Max 9 User Guide
Version 9.1.3-rev.0

cycling74.com

1

Contents
Intro
User Guide
What's New in Max 9
Glossary of Common Terminology

7
8
10
13

Audio
Ableton DSP
Frequency Domain Processing
MC
MC and Gen
MC Wrapper
Multi-Channel Audio I/O
Non-real-time Processing
Audio Plugins
Polyphony
Recording and Exporting
RNBO
Sample Accurate Messages

22
23
25
33
34
35
36
41
45
51
63
69
71

Colors
Color Palette
Color Themes
Dynamic Colors
Format Palette
Styles
Syntax Coloring

74
75
85
91
95
98
109

Data
Arrays
Dictionaries
Integers and Floats
Strings

114
115
121
129
132

Debugging

138

2

Debugging and Probing
Error Messages
Illustration Mode
Max Console

139
147
152
155

Files
File Browser
File Types
Search Path

164
165
171
177

Gen
Gen
Gen Common Operators
GenExpr
gen~ Operators
Jitter Operators

183
184
213
220
239
246

Jitter
Depth Testing and Layering

249
250

Geometry Objects
Graphics Engine
Graphics Processing
Jitter expr
The JXS File Format
Jitter Matrix
Render Passes
Textures
Video
Video Engine

255
263
265
280
291
308
331
340
348
354

Max Interface
Action Menu
Documentation Window
Extras Menu
Inspector
Object Reference
Preferences
Search
Patcher Toolbars

357
358
363
374
376
384
399
414
418

3

MIDI
Mapping
MIDI

453
454
453

Parameters
OpenSoundControl
Connecting Parameters
Parameter Mode
Presets and Interpolation
Saving State with pattr
Snapshots

469
470
472
477
489
496
506

Patching
Conversion Cheat Sheet
Messages
Message Types
Objects
Patcher Lifecycle
Patching
Patch Cords
Patching Mechanics
Web Browser and jweb

516
517
539
546
553
565
516
591
599
602

Reuse and Organization
Abstractions
Using bpatchers
Custom UI Objects
Externals
Packages
Package Manager
Projects
Prototypes
Snippets
Subpatchers and Encapsulation
Templates

610
611
618
624
636
640
649
655
662
665
669
673

Scripting
Scripting
External Text Editor

676
677
680

4

JavaScript
jit.gl.lua
The define Message
Controlling Max with Messages
REPL

683
695
714
718
760

Sharing
Sharing Patchers
Projects
Standalones and Collectives

772
772
655
785

Timing
Scheduler and Priority
Time Value Syntax
Transport

797
798
807
811

Max for Live
Max for Live
Live API Overview
Creating Max for Live Devices
User Interfaces in Max for Live
Automation
Sharing Max for Live Devices
Timing and Synchronization in Max for Live

815
816
820
832
834
836
838
839

Max for Live Extended
Creating Audio Effect Devices
Creating Devices that use the Live API
Creating MIDI Effects
Device Parameters in Max for Live
Freezing Max for Live Devices
Max for Live Limitations
Max for Live MIDI Tools
Presets
Preview Mode
Resolving Conflicts in Frozen Devices
The Parameters Window
Unfreezing Devices
Using pattr in Live Devices
Using Symbols in Max for Live

840
841
843
859
861
868
870
874
892
894
896
898
903
905
907

5

Working With Files in Max for Live
Appendix A: MC Extended
Gen Features for MC

908
910
911

Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances
MC and Max for Live

913
918

MC Channel Topology
MC Dynamic Routing

919
923

MC Event Objects
Multichannel Function Generators

930
931

MC Gen Instances
MC Gen Operators

936
938

MC Managed Polyphony
MC Mixing and Panning

939
945

MC Patch Cords
MC Polyphony

955
957

MC Recording and Playback
MC Signal Manipulation Objects

959
961

MC Spatialization
MC Visualization and Probing

965
967

MC vs MCS Objects
Messages to the MC Wrapper

970
973

Multichannel Delay Systems
Polyphony Using mc.poly~

978
981

Polyphony with Multiple Patchers
Processing Events from MC Objects

984
985

Using mc.gen with the MC Wrapper
Using Plug-ins with MC

988
991

Appendix B: Lua Extended

996

jit.gl.lua Color Bindings
jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

997
1009

jit.gl.lua OpenGL GLU Bindings
jit.gl.lua Vector Math

1041
1043

Credits

1057

6

User Guide / Intro

Intro

7

User Guide / Intro / Max User Guide

User Guide
New in Max 9
Demos

8
8

Tutorials
API Reference

9
9

Welcome to the Max user guide. This guide covers everything to do with how Max works, including
the fundamentals of objects, messages, and patchers; the different parts of the Max interface; and
how to do things like process sound and work with graphics.

If you're new to Max, you might find it useful to read how to use this documentation

This documentation is also available in PDF format, for viewing offine.

New in Max 9
If you're a long-time Max user and you want to see what's new in Max 9, check out this overview.

Demos
If you want to see some of what you can do with Max, check out these demos:

Name

Description

JavaScript
Codebox

Mix textual and visual programming with inline codebox supporting
modern JavaScript

8

User Guide / Intro / Max User Guide

Jitter Geometry

Half-edge structures for shapes that you can morph and distort

Ableton DSP

Use Ableton DSP algorithms for synthesis, modulation, and effects

Tutorials
These tutorials can guide you through working with Max step-by-step.

Working with Max - The basics of working with Max, including setting up timers and events,
building a user interface, handling input from the webcam, and generating sound.
Signal Processing - How to generate and manipulate audio signals, extacting automation
from real-time audio signals, and working with samples.
Video Processing - Setting up a graphics environment, making dynamic visualizations, and
generating audio-reactive effects.
Jitter Geometry - Using the jit.geom objects, introduced in Max 9, to manipulate dynamic
geometry using the half-edge structure.
If you want to get inspired with even more Max examples, check out our Examples Gallery

API Reference
Max exposes several APIs—Application Programming Interfaces—that let you use code to control
various systems in Max. You can write short scripts to automate simple tasks, or large programs that
completely change the way Max behaves. Some of the APIs that Max offers:

JavaScript API: Use the v8, v8ui and v8.codebox to embed JavaScript in a Max patch.
Define custom objects, programmatically create objects and patch cords, and operate the
Max application.
Live Object Model: Use Max objects like live.object and live.path to read and modify the
state of Ableton Live from within a Max for Live device. Also accessible from the JavaScript
API.
Node for Max: Use the node.script and node.debug objects to launch custom Node.js
scripts from Max. Send Max messages to a running Node process and fetch a result.

9

User Guide / Intro / What's New in Max 9

What's New in Max 9
Jitter
Audio

10
10

JavaScript and Coding
Patching Enhancements

11
11

User Interaction and Interface Tools

11

Jitter
Jitter Geometry — A specialized group of Jitter objects designed to work with Half-edge
Geometry Structures. This makes geometry manipulations like redistributing and adding
vertices much more efficient.
jit.fx - Tons of Jitter effects packaged as jit.fx objects, giving you access to effects,
compositing, transitions, and analysis shaders. Each one has a help file and reference page.

jit.ui — New Jitter UI objects for building interfaces and "heads-up displays".

Audio

10

User Guide / Intro / What's New in Max 9

ABL Objects — These objects offer a patchable interface to the internal workings of some of
Ableton Live Suite's most popular devices.
loudness~ — Reports the loudness of a signal according to the EBU R 128 standard
jweb~ — Load a web browser inside a patcher, capture its audio, and route the audio output
into Max.
Global Record — Record the output of a patcher with a single click, from the patcher
toolbar.

JavaScript and Coding
JavaScript V8 — Modern JavaScript engine, supporting JavaScript classes, the spread
operator, destructuring assignment, typed arrays, and much more.
Codebox — top-level codebox objects like v8.codebox for JavaScript and node.codebox for
node.script.
REPL — Read-evaluate-print-loop interface for controlling Max using text entry

Patching Enhancements
Patcher List View — See all the objects in your patch in a hierarchical list.
Illustration Mode — Understand how your patcher works by running it in slow motion.
New Preferences Window — Updated, tabbed UI for Max preferences
Syntax Coloring — Increased readability for object boxes with colored text for object names,
arguments, attributes, and attribute arguments.
New Documentation — Documentation rewritten and modernized.

User Interaction and Interface Tools
Integrated OSC — Controll Max with any OSC-compatible device or application, and send
OSC messages to control other OSC-enabled systems.
hid — Modern human interface device input object
Param Connect — Connect parameter-enabled UI objects to supported objects without

11

User Guide / Intro / What's New in Max 9

patch cords
poly~ param Object — Named parameters in poly~ subpatchers
Preset Interpolation — Blend between presets floats or the nodes object

12

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

Glossary of Common Terminology
#

13

A

14

B
C

14
15

D

15

E

15

F
G

15
15

H

16

I

16

J
L

16
16

M

17

N

17

O
P

18
18

Q

19

R

20

S
T

20
21

There are many terms used throughout the Max documentation that are unique to the application.
Understanding what these terms refer to will help when learning the software. Below is a list of the
most commonly used terms in Max, along with their respective definitions.

#
# : The pound sign (#) is a special character that indicates a changeable argument
specifically within an abstraction. Message boxes, object boxes, and some object attributes
within an abstraction can be given a changeable argument by typing in a pound sign and a
number (e.g. #1) as an argument. When the abstraction is used inside another patcher, an
argument typed into the object box in the patcher replaces the # argument inside the
abstraction. Using a zero with the pound sign (#0) at the beginning of a symbol argument

13

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

(e.g., #0_value), transforms that argument into an identifier that is unique to each instance
of an abstraction (and its subpatchers) when it is loaded.
$ : The dollar sign ($) is a special character that indicates a changeable argument in a
message box or an object. If used in a message box, $ should be followed by a number in the
range 1-9 (such as $2). That argument will then be replaced by the corresponding argument
in the incoming message. If used in an expr, if, sxformat, or vexpr object, $ must be followed
immediately by the letter i, f, or s, which indicates whether the argument is to be replaced
by an int, a float, or a symbol.
--- : The three dash (---) identifier is used for coll, dict, and in the context of Max for Live. It
serves as a way to create unique names for objects. In the context of Max for Live, if you
want a named object to be unique to a device, use three dashes (---) to start the name of
your buffer or send/receive destination.

A
Abstraction : Any patch you have created and saved can be used as an object in another
patch just by typing the filename of your patch into an object box as if it were an object
name. Patches used in this way are called abstractions.
Argument : Many objects have arguments which set the initial state of an object. Arguments
are typed into the object box after the object's name. All possible arguments for an object
are listed in their respective Object Reference Pages.
Attribute : Many objects have attributes. An attribute is a setting or property that tells the
object how to do its job. These can be set in a variety of ways which are outlined.
Attrui : An attrui is an object which displays attribute values of the object it is connected to.
If you connect an attrui to another object via a patch cord, it will intelligently display all
attributes for that object via a dropdown menu and show their corresponding values when
selected.

B
Bang : Bang is a type of message that tells the receiving object to do whatever it is designed
to do. It basically tells an object to "Go!". More information on bang messages can be found
here.
BEAP : The BEAP package is a collection of audio-processing modules that are automatically
included with Max. Each module has a help file that explains its function.

14

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

C
Changeable Argument : There are two special characters in Max that indicate changeable
arguments: # and $ . Please refer to their respective definitions for more information.
Collection : A collection is a kind of virtual file folder where you can store patchers, media,
saved searches, and any other kind of Max resources you would like to group together for
convenience.
Console : A window (Window >Max Console ) that displays status information, error
messages, and warnings related to your patch.
Contextual Menu : A menu that appears when control-clicking (Mac) or right-clicking on the
patcher background, an object, or a patch cord in an unlocked patch. This menu provides
various options that are relevant to the overall patcher, the object selected, or the patch
cord selected.

D
Device : A device is a type of patch that is specifically designed to work within Ableton Live
as an audio effect, MIDI effect, or instrument. Devices can also be used within Max.
However, they are not compatible with other DAWs.
Dictionary : A dictionary is a collection of key-value pairs that can be passed between
objects. Each key in the dictionary is a unique symbol. Each value may be a number, symbol,
list, array, or another dictionary.

E
Event : An event is the passing of a non-signal message between two objects.
External : A binary file that contains one or more Max objects.

F
Float : A floating-point number, a.k.a. a number with a decimal point.

G

15

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

Gen : Gen is an extension of the Max patching environment that converts what you build
visually into efficient, compiled code as you go. Gen code can be used outside of Max with
Code Export. Gen includes the gen~ and mc.gen~ objects for audio, and the jit.pix and
jit.gen objects for matrix and texture processing.

H
Help File : Every object in Max has a help file. Help Files are interactive patches that
demonstrate how an object works. To access an object's help file you can either right-click
(ctrl+click) on the object in an unlocked patch and select "Open Help", or click the "Open
Help" button from the object's reference page.

I
Inlet : A "port" at the top of an object where information is sent via a patch cord.
Information is passed from the outlet of one object to the inlet of another object. Each inlet
can receive a certain type of information. Hover over an inlet with your mouse in an
unlocked patch to see what type of information it can receive.
Inspector : There is both an Object Inspector and a Patcher Inspector. The Object Inspector
is used to edit the attributes of Max objects. The Patcher Inspector is used to edit settings
for a patcher window.
Integer : A whole number, a.k.a. a number without a decimal point.

J
Jitter : Jitter is the visual processing side of Max. All Jitter objects begin with "jit." For help
getting started with Jitter, see this group of tutorials.

L
List : A message with several numbers and/or symbols is called a list; the list is a mechanism
for keeping data together into a single message that can be sent via patchcords to other
objects. There is no inherent structure to a list; lists are organized simply as one item after
the other.

16

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

Live Object Model (LOM) : The LOM is used in conjunction with Ableton Live. It is
essentially a roadmap to each of Live's parameters that are accessible via Max for Live.
Using the LOM you can control everything in Live's API that is accessible to Max for Live.
Lock/Unlock : A patch can either be locked or unlocked. You unlock a patch to edit it and
you lock a patch to perform with it and adjust UI objects.

M
Matrix : A matrix is a grid with each location in the grid containing some information. This
term is specifically used in the context of Jitter, the visual processing side of Max. In Jitter, a
matrix can have any number of dimensions from 1 to 32.
Max : Max is the name of the application, but the word also stands for the data processing
side of the software. For help getting started with Max-specific patching, see this list of
tutorials.
Max for Live : Max for Live is a separate application that is specifically designed to be
integrated into Ableton Live. Max for Live allows you to use the Max development
environment to create your own Live content. For more information on Max for Live see this
page.
MC : MC refers to a set of multichannel objects in Max. These objects allow for multiple
channels of audio processing and pass multichannel audio signals using a single patchcord.
MC objects typically have an mc. or mcs. prefix.
Message : Max patches function by passing messages between objects. Messages tell
objects what to do. For a list of what messages an object can receive, see the object's
reference page.
Message Box : A message box is a clickable object for storing, displaying, and passing
messages between objects.
Method : Another name for a message. See the "Message" entry above for further details.
MSP : MSP is the audio processing side of Max. All MSP objects end with a "~". For help
getting started with MSP, see this list of tutorials.

N
Node for Max : Node for Max is a package, automatically included in Max. that lets you
write custom applications using the Node JavaScript framework then control and

17

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

communicate with those applications from Max. For Node for Max documentation, open the
Documentation Window in Max and look for the Node for Max package documentation.
Number : Numbers refer to both floats and integers.

O
Object : Objects are the building blocks of a patch – they perform specific tasks, and
operate like miniature programs within the larger environment.
Object Action Menu : The object action menu , accessible from the left side of every object,
provides a quick way to access the help file, reference page, and object inspector for that
object. It also provides sub-menus to discover messages and attributes associated with the
object, and serves as an aid to Max patching.
Object Reference Page : Every object in Max has its own reference page . This page serves
as a manual for the object, explaining what the object does and how to control it with
arguments, attributes, and messages.
Operate While Unlocked : A mode that allows you to adjust user interface objects while
patching. Sliders, dials, and other controls are all active in this mode which means you don't
have to lock the patcher to operate them. To activate the Operate While Unlocked mode,
click the "Enable Operate While Unlocked" button on the bottom patcher window toolbar.
Operator : An operator is a Gen object.
Outlet : A "port" at the bottom of an object where information is sent out. Information is
passed from the outlet of one object to the inlet of another object via a patch cord. Each
outlet sends a certain type of information. Hover over an outlet with your mouse in an
unlocked patch to see what type of information is sent out.

P
Package : Packages are a convenient way to bundle objects, media, patchers, and resources
for distribution. A package is simply a folder adhering to a prescribed structure and placed in
the 'packages' folder. Once placed in the correct location, the package contents are
seamlessly integrated into Max.
Package Manager : The Package Manager, which is accessed by selecting “Show Package
Manager” from the File menu, provides access to a regularly updated, curated selection of
Max add-on content. Some packages listed are created in-house, while others are created

18

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

by third-party developers. Typically, installing one of these packages will give you access to
new objects, patchers, and other Max related content.
Parameter : Parameters are a simple representation of the current state of that object,
compatible with presets, pattr, and snapshots
Patch Cord : Patch cords are used to connect objects together in Max. Information is passed
from one object to another using a patch cord. There are four different types of patch cords
— those used for Max objects, audio patch cords used for MSP objects, MC patch cords
used specifically for multichannel objects, and Jitter patch cords. Each type of patch cord
has a unique look.
Patcher : A Max patcher is the graphical canvas that you move objects around on. A Max
patch is the file or program that you create in Max. You create Max patches and you patch in
Max.
Presentation Mode : A different patcher view that allows you to arrange and resize user
interface objects in your patch independently of their functional position and size in
patching mode.Presentation Mode is typically used to design a user-friendly interface for a
patch. When a patcher is in Presentation Mode, the Presentation Mode button in the
bottom patcher window toolbar will turn green/yellow and the word (presentation) will
appear in the title bar of the patcher window.
Probe : Probing allows you to view data that is passed through patch cords. This can be very
helpful when debugging a patch. There are three types of probes: matrix, signal, and event.
The matrix probe allows you to monitor data flowing through a Jitter patch cord. The signal
probe allows you to monitor data flowing through an MSP (audio) patch cord. The event
probe displays event data that is passed through a Max patch cord. All three types can be
activated via the Debug menu.
Project : A Project is a collection of dependencies that are used in a patch. These
dependencies may include patches, abstractions, JavaScript files, media files, data files,
third-party externals, etc. Projects are an easy way to keep related files in the same place,
and allow for Project-specific search path management outside of the standard Max Search
Paths.

Q
Quickref Menu : The Quickref Menu displays a list of all messages and attributes that the
selected Max object accepts. To access this menu, control-click (Mac) or right-click on any
inlet to a Max object. Selecting a menu item will automatically create a message box or
attrui that is connected to the object via a patch cord.

19

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

R
RNBO : A library and toolchain that can take Max-like patches and export them as portable
code. RNBO can directly compile that code to targets like a VST, a Max External, or a
Raspberry Pi. The online documentation for RNBO can be found here.

S
Scheduler : The internal timing mechanism used to determine when and in what order
events in Max are processed.Scheduler settings can be adjusted in the Preferences window.
Shader : A shader is a program that performs a calculation to determine how a 3D object is
rendered in a 2D frame. Determining factors include the object’s color and position, lighting,
texture coordinates, and material characteristics such as how shiny or matte the object
should appear.
Signal : This refers to audio data in Max. When audio data is passed between objects, the
patch cord is yellow and grey striped.
Snapshot : Snapshots let you save the state of parameters in your patcher. They are closely
related to VST and Audio Unit presets. You can define presets for patchers, vst~, amxd~, and
rnbo~ objects.
Snippet : A snippet is a patcher file that typically contains a sequence of objects you use
often and don't want to have to constantly re-create as you work. Dragging and dropping a
snippet from the left-hand toolbar into your patcher will automatically add the contents of
that snippet to your patch.
Standalone : A standalone is basically an application built from a Max patch. Any patch can
be turned into a standalone, which looks and acts like a standard Macintosh or Windows
application. You do not need Max installed on your computer to run a standalone. Every
standalone includes a runtime version of Max.
Style : Styles allow you to standardize the look of objects by changing their colors and font
settings. You can apply a style to a specific Max patch, create your own personal library of
styles to be applied as you patch, or make use of "factory styles" that come with Max. To
learn more about Styles, see this guide.
Subpatcher : A subpatcher is a patch within a patch. Subpatches are often used to organize
your work.

20

User Guide / Intro / Glossary of Common Terminology

Symbol : A symbol is essentially a word in Max. A message box with the word "hello" would
be considered a symbol. However, numbers and lists can also be considered symbols if they
are in quotation marks or converted using the tosymbol object. See this guide for
information on how to include special characters in symbols.

T
Template : A template is a preconfigured Max patch that is intended to be a starting point
for creating certain patches. Templates can include objects that you often use as well as
specific patcher attributes for setting the look of your patching environment. Max comes
with a selection of premade templates, or you can create your own.
Texture : A texture is essentially an image that is overlaid upon geometry. Textures are used
in the context of Jitter. Just like other images in Jitter, textures have an alpha, red, green,
and blue component.
Theme : As of Max 8, you have the ability to select from a number of color themes using the
Color Theme preference in the Preference Window.Themes change the application-wide
colors of patcher toolbars, the sidebar, and other interface elements (as well as default
patcher colors).
Time Values : Time Values refer to any measurement of time used in Max. There are two
types of time values: fixed time values and tempo-relative time values. Fixed time values
express an amount of time that doesn't change. These include milliseconds,
hours/minutes/seconds, samples, and frequency. Tempo-relative time values vary according
to the current tempo set in a transport object. These include ticks, note values, and
bars/beats/units.
Toolbar : Toolbars provide quick access to commonly used tools in Max, as well as audio and
video samples, images, and plugins. There are two types of toolbars: patcher toolbars and
toolbar mini browsers. For further information on each toolbar, see the Patcher Window
documentation.
Transport : A tempo-based timing mechanism that can be used to keep time and/or control
the behavior of certain objects. There is both a transport object and a Global Transport
found under the Extras menu.

21

User Guide / Audio

Audio

22

User Guide / Audio / Ableton DSP

Ableton DSP
abl.device vs. abl.dsp
Inlets and attributes

23
24

Internal smoothing

24

The Ableton DSP package is a collection of objects that bring Ableton Live devices and high-level
DSP components into Max. From oscillators to modulators and filters to reverbs, these objects
provide building blocks that speed up patch creation.

abl.device vs. abl.dsp
The prefixes "abl.device" and "abl.dsp" are used to distinguish between objects that wrap entire Live
devices and objects that wrap DSP components. For instance, abl.device.utility~ has the same
functionality as the Live Utility device, whereas abl.dsp.ramp~ wraps one of the modulators in Live's
Meld instrument and abl.dsp.shimmer~ wraps one of Live's Hybrid Reverb audio effects.

23

User Guide / Audio / Ableton DSP

Inlets and attributes
In most Ableton DSP objects, there are a select number of parameters that can be changed as either
attributes or signals. For example, the @ratio attribute of abl.dsp.harmonicfm~ can be controlled
via the third inlet. When a signal is connected to the inlet, the attribute will become disabled while
the signal takes over control. If the signal is disconnected, the attribute will re-enable.

Internal smoothing
Unlike most Max objects, Ableton DSP objects offer internal parameter smoothing. Whenever a
float-type attribute is changed at event-rate (from an attrui or float inlet, for example), a short ramp
is applied instead of immediately stepping to the new value. This mitigates "zipper noise" as
attributes are changed at event-rate. However, if you control a parameter at signal rate by attaching
a signal to an inlet, no extra smoothing is applied.

24

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

Frequency Domain Processing
What is Frequency Domain Signal Processing?

25

The fft~ and ifft~ Objects
The pfft~ Object
Using gen~

25
27
32

Max provides several objects for working in the Frequency Domain, including an object for
performing a Fourier Transform fft~, as well as an object that can perform an Inverse Fourier
Transform ifft~. Most of the time, it's easier to work with the convienience object pfft~, which
abstracts over some of the technical details of working with the Fourier transform, including
windowing and overlap-add. Very often, you'll see Fourier transform abbreviated to FFT, or Fast
Fourier Transform.

What is Frequency Domain Signal Processing?
Fourier analysis transforms a signal from a time domain representation to one in the frequency
domain. Instead of specifying the value of a discete signal (for example sound) at a specific point in
time, a frequency domain representation gives the amplitude and phase of each of several
sinusoidal functions that, when summed together, would reproduce the original function.

The fft~ and ifft~ Objects
The fft~ object takes a signal as input and outputs the real and imaginary components. The
arguments to the fft~ object let you specify the size of the analysis window, as well as the spacing
between analysis frames. You can also specify a global offset in frames, which will offset the Fourier
analysis of this particular fft~ object against other fft~ objects. This is useful for performing
overlap-add. The cartopol~ object converts between cartesian and polar coordinates, and will
transform real-imaginary pairs to amplitude-phase pairs. The last outlet of fft~ and ifft~ is the
current analysis bin, which is useful for synchronizing the Fourier transform with other processes.

25

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

Fourier analysis of a sawtooth signal at 220 Hertz, using an fft~ object. The cartopol~ object converts to the more
intuitive amplitude and phase.

You can perform the inverse of a Fourier transform with the ifft~ object. The arguments to an ifft~
object are the same as to fft~, and passing a signal first through fft~ and then ifft~ should recover
the original signal exactly.

26

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

The pfft~ Object
Most of the time, we want to do something with the signal after taking the Fourier transform.
Techniques like phase vocoding, comvolution, and spectral delay all work by taking an input signal,
transforming that signal to a frequency domain representation, doing some operation, and then
transforming the signal back. However, since we're working with successive frames of Fourier
analysis, this can introduce discontinuities, which will become very audible distortions to the final
signal.

Commonly, we combine a windowing technique with an overlap-add technique to smooth out the
audio signal. Essentially, we analyze the same input signal multiple times with a sliding window, and
add the output together after transforming back from the frequency domain.

It's possible to use multiple fft~ and ifft~ objects to do this, but it's usually much easier to use pfft~.
The pfft~ object loads a patch as an abstraction, and then takes care of all of the windowing and
overlap-add behind the scenes. The abstraction loaded by pfft~ is free to work entirely in the
frequency domain, without worrying about the details of how the Fourier analysis is taking place.

27

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

A classic vocoder effect, using pfft~. The pfft~ object takes care of windowing and overlap-add, without the user
needed to think about these details.

The argument to a pfft~ object is simply the name of the patcher to load as an abstraction. Similar
to fft~, it's also possible to specify the size of the FFT analysis frame, which must be a power of
two. Because pfft~ is also performing overlap-add, it's also possible to set the overlap factor as an
argument. Changing the analysis frame size and the overlap factor will affect the quality of the FFT
output.

Inlets and outlets
Similar to polyphonic patches loaded with poly~, the pfft~ object uses special inlet and outlet
objects. For regular Max messages, use the in and out objects. For signal, pfft~, uses the fftin~ and
fftout~ objects.

28

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

As is the case with poly~, if a signal inlet created with fftin~ shares an index with an in
object, the parent pfft~ object will create in inlet that can accept messages or signals.

The in object has an index 1, and fftin~ has the same index. The parent inlet can accept a message
'hello' or a signal.

Unlike regular inlet and outlet objects, the fftin~ and fftout~ objects take an argument to specify
their index. This means that multiple fftin~ objects can refer to the same inlet, and multiple fftout~
objects can refer to the same outlet. If a signal goes to two different fftout~ objects that refer to
the same outlet, those signals will be summed.

The fftin~ and fftout~ objects also let you specify a window function to use on the incoming signal.
The special window name nofft disables the Fourier transform entirely, which lets you send audio
signals into the subpatcher without transforming them.

29

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

A simplistic noise gate effect implemented in pfft~. The second inlet uses the 'nofft' window, which disables the FFT
operation on the second inlet. This lets the user set the threshold for the gate using a signal.

Bin index
The last outlet of the fftin~ object specifies the bin index, a continuous ramp from 00 to 𝐹𝑟/2 − 1
F r/2 − 1, where 𝐹𝑟F r is the frame size. This is very useful for synchronizing the the FFT itself with
other processes. For example, it's common to use the bin index in conjunction with poke~ and
index~, to record and play back an FFT.

30

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

Using poke~ and index~ in conjunction with the bin index output of fftin~. This patcher wouldn't really do
anything, since the amplitude and phase signals are being read back from the buffer as soon as they're written.
However, this illustrates the principle.

fftinfo
In the context of a pfft~ subpatcher, use the fftinfo~ object to report information about the pfft~
parent patcher. This can be very useful if your pfft~ patcher needs to work differently depending on
the way in which the FFT is being computed. For example, you might resize a buffer to hold a single
frame of FFT analysis data.

Window function
Specify a window function as an argument to fftin~ or fftout~. Supported window functions are
square (no window), triangle , hanning (the default), hamming , and blackman . The special
window name nofft disables the Fourier transform entirely, which lets you send audio signals into
the subpatcher without transforming them.

Full spectrum
The second argument to pfft~ lets you specify the size of the analysis frame for the Fourier
transform. For a given FFT frame size 𝑁N , this will generate 𝑁N complex pairs. This means that

31

User Guide / Audio / Frequency Domain Processing

the larger the analysis frame size, the greater the frequency resolution if the FFT (although because
the frame is larger, this reduces the temporal resolution). However, the full FFT is actually
symmetric, so even though an FFT frame size 𝑁N will yield 𝑁N complex pairs, the result has only
really resolved the input into 𝑁/2N /2 unique frequencies. Normally, pfft~ abstracts over this, and
simply leaves out the symmetric, complex pairs. However, you can use the fullspectrum
argument to ask for the complete FFT analysis. This is an argument to pfft~, so all other arguments
must be supplied as well.

A pfft~ object with the text 'pfft~ gate-subpatcher 512 4 0 1'. The arguments '512 4 0' specify the default values
for the first three numeric arguments, but they must be supplied in order to specify a non-default value for the last
argument, asking for a full spectrum analysis.

Using gen~
When using gen~ inside of a pfft~ object, you can use the gen objects fftinfo, fftfullspect, ffthop,
fftoffset, and fftsize to retrieve information about the FFT context in which gen~ is operating. You
can also make use of the gen~ constants FFTFULLSPECT , FFTHOP , FFTOFFSET , and FFTSIZE .

32

User Guide / Audio / MC

MC
Topics

33

MC supports multiple channels of audio in a single patchcord. It also allows standard Max audio
objects to operate on many channels of audio at the same time.

Signal visualization objects such as meter~ and scope~will adapt themselves to multichannel input
signals.

The MC Wrapper holds multiple instances of Max audio objects in a single object box. Wrapped
object names start with mc, for instance mc.cycle~ is the MC-wrapped cycle~ object. The wrapper
also offers many powerful features for controlling multiple objects.

In addition to MC wrapper objects, MC-specific objects aid in multichannel signal manipulation.

Topics
Spatialization - Working with multiple channels over multiple speakers or output channels
Polyphony - Managing polyphony with MC
Gen - MC and Gen
Events - Events and MC objects
Mixing and Panning - Up- and down-mixing, multi-speaker panning, and signal routing
Plug-ins - Hosting plug-ins in MC
Dynamic Routing - Sending multi-channel signals to different places

33

User Guide / Audio / MC and Gen

MC and Gen
See Also

34

Gen and MC combine in the following objects:

mc.gen~ contains individual instances of gen~ via the MC Wrapper, so it can take advantage
of all the features available to any wrapped object.
mcs.gen~, like other mcs.* objects, combines the separate Gen inputs and outputs defined
by inX and outX operators into a multi-channels input and output.
mc.gen contains multiple instances of the event-based gen object. It has an additional outlet
that informs Max of the voice number associated with any outgoing message.

See Also
Using mc.gen With the MC Wrapper
MC Gen Instances
Gen Features for MC
MC Gen Operators

34

User Guide / Audio / MC Wrapper

MC Wrapper
When you type mc.cycle~ into an object box, one or more traditional cycle~ objects are embedded
inside the MC Wrapper.

The wrapper holds multiple instances of audio objects such as cycle~. It permits you to control all of
the objects at once with one message or target individual objects. It also manages multi-channel
connections to other MC objects. For the most part, this is done transparently and you don't have
to think about the wrapper too much. But wrapped objects share some useful messages and
attributes not availble in the "unwrapped" versions.

A general rule of thumb is that if there is an MSP object xxx~, mc.xxx~ will be xxx~ in the MC
Wrapper. But this is not always the case. Exceptions include:

Objects that perform I/O: mc.adc~, mc.dac~, mc.ezadc~, mc.plugin~, mc.plugout~,
mc.ezdac~, mc.sfplay~, and mc.sfrecord~. In these cases, you don't need multiple copies of
objects, you just need multi-channel inputs and outputs to the outside world
UI objects including gain sliders (mc.live.gain~, mc.gain~, mc.multigain~) and signal
visualization objects including scope~, meter~, levelmeter~ and spectroscope~. The mc. is
optional and does nothing for these objects, as they auto-adapt to the number of channels
of a multichannel input signal.
mc.tapin~, mc.tapout~, mc.send~, mc.receive~ : these can be thought of as I/O objects to
internal memory buffers
Any objects begining with mcs which are single instances of audio objects whose inputs
and/or outputs are combined into a single multi-channel inlet and/or outlet
MC objects specific to multi-channel signal manipulation

35

User Guide / Audio / Multi-Channel Audio I/O

Multi-Channel Audio I/O
Logical and Physical Audio Channels
Assigning Logical to Physical Channels
MC Hardware Interfacing

36
37
38

Working with Multichannel Input
Working with Multichannel Output

38
39

Audio Hardware Routing
See Also

40
40

The first part of this guide describes how audio input and output works in Max, specifically how
channels map to hardware. The second part describes how MC works with audio hardware. Work
with patch cords and objects that deal with multiple channels simplifies working with audio
hardware, but is not absoltely necessary.

Logical and Physical Audio Channels
Max provides up to 1024 logical audio channels that you can dynamically assign to the physical
channels of your audio hardware.

When you create an dac~ or adc~ object with different channel numbers as arguments, these
numbers refer to logical channels. These channels are internal to Max, and they can be dynamically
reassigned to physical device channels of a particular driver using either the Audio Status window,
its I/O Mappings subwindow, or an adstatus object with an input or output keyword argument.

The purpose of having both logical channels and physical device channels is to allow you to create
patches that use as many channels as you need without regard to the particular hardware
configuration you're using. For instance, some audio interfaces use physical device channels 3 and 4
for S/PDIF input and output, others use channels 9 and 10 instead. Without logical mapping you
would have to change the arguments on all of your adc~ and dac~ objects when you changed
interfaces.

Note that logical channels can map to a single physical channel.

36

User Guide / Audio / Multi-Channel Audio I/O

Assigning Logical to Physical Channels
To configure the assignment of logical to physical audio channels, open the Audio I/O Mappings
window from the Preferences window toolbar.

The window displays assignment menus for logical input and output channels in groups of 16. This
is the default assignment for a single-channel audio input device and a two-channel audio output
device.

The assignment menu contains the physical channels of the selected hardware input or output
devices. For example, here is the output assignment menu when using a Focusrite interface that has
eight output channels.

37

User Guide / Audio / Multi-Channel Audio I/O

Use the menu to set the desired physical channel for each logical channel you want to use.

To move to another bank of 16 channels, use the menus for input and output at the top of the
Audio I/O Mappings window.

MC Hardware Interfacing
MC provides flexible managment of multichannel signals, but interfacing with your hardware
requires system-specific setup and routing. The adc~ object for audio input has a multichannel
counterpart (mc.adc~) with a single multichannel output, and the dac~ object for audio output has a
multichannel counterpart (mc.dac~) with a single multichannel input.

Working with Multichannel Input
Use mc.adc~ object to obtain a multi-channel input signal from your audio interface.

Create an instance of the mc.adc~ with the input channels that you want to access. The
channels are numbered starting with 1.
Connect the multichannel signal output to any processing or monitoring objects to work
with the MC content.

38

User Guide / Audio / Multi-Channel Audio I/O

A multi-channel version of ezadc~ with two signals in one patch cord is availble with mc.ezadc~.

Working with Multichannel Output
Use mc.dac~ to send a multi-channel audio output signal to your audio interface.

Create an instance of mc.dac~ with the output channels that you want to access. The
channels are numbered starting at 1.
Connect a multichannel signal to the input of the object to send the audio stream to your
interface.

A multi-channel version of ezdac~ that outputs all channels of its input multi-channel signal is
availble with mc.ezdac~.

39

User Guide / Audio / Multi-Channel Audio I/O

Audio Hardware Routing
In addition to setting up the inputs and outputs of your patch, you will also need to verify the
hardware input and output routings are correct. This is done using the Audio I/O Mappings window
available in the Preferences window toolbar.

The Audio I/O Mappings window establishes mappings between channels on your audio interface
hardware and Max's 1024 virtual channels.

For each input channel you wish to use for multichannel input (via mc.adc~), choose a hardware
input from the pop-up menu. For each output channel you wish to use for multichannel output (via
mc.dac~), choose a hardware output from the pop-up menu. You can assign the same hardware
input or output to any number of virtual channels.

See Also
Spatialization with MC
MC in Max for Live

40

User Guide / Audio / Non-real-time Processing

Non-real-time Processing
Non-real-time Audio
Non-real-time Video

41
43

Most of the time, Max is running in real-time. For every video and audio frame, Max produces just
enough video and audio to fill that frame. If you tweak a parameter or modulate an effect, you can
see and hear the result right away.

There are two main limitations to real-time processing:

Some processes are too computationally intensive to run in real-time.
It takes exactly as long to render a process in real-time as the resulting media. So, it takes
10 minutes to render a 10 minute video in real-time, even if it could have been processed
faster.
By processing audio or video in non real-time, you can get around both of these limitations.

Non-real-time Audio
In the Audio Status Window select the NonRealTime driver.

41

User Guide / Audio / Non-real-time Processing

In non-real-time mode, hardware input and output are disabled. Audio processing runs
independently of any physical scheduling priority, which essentially means that Max runs the audio
thread as fast as possible. This means that patches designed to run in non-real-time mode have a
typical structure:

1. Some way to activate audio processing
2. Some way to monitor the state of audio processing (often polling dsptime~ to measure
elapsed processing time)
3. An automatic way to disable audio processing
This patcher enables audio processing, waits 100 milliseconds, and then prints the elapsed time
according to dsptime~, which measures how many milliseconds of audio have been processed.

42

User Guide / Audio / Non-real-time Processing

As you can see, about 10 seconds of audio have been processed in 100 milliseconds of real-time.

The typical way to capture audio output in non-real-time mode is to record to a file with sfrecord~.
The following patcher synthesizes about a second of noise and captures the output.

Non-real-time Video
Recording video in non-real-time is a bit simpler than recording audio in non-real-time. The easiest
method is to use jit.record with the @realtime attribute disabled. In this mode, every time
jit.record receives a matrix, it will be appended to the currently open video file. The frame rate of
the output will be determined by the @fps attribute of the jit.record object and not by the realtime rate at which new matrices are recieved.

If you're using jit.world or jit.pworld to manage your virtual scene, set the @enable attribute to 0
to disable automatic rendering. In this configuration, you can send a bang to jit.world to manually
render a single frame. If you're using jit.gl.render to render a virtual scene to a texture, you can pass
your texture through a jit.matrix to convert it before output.

43

User Guide / Audio / Non-real-time Processing

44

User Guide / Audio / Plugins

Audio Plugins
Loading a Plugin

46

User Interface

47

Most DAWs (Digital Audio Workstations) support plug-ins, which let third parties extend the audio
processing capabilities of the main software. Max supports Audio Unit, VST, and VST3 plug-ins, and
can load Max for Live devices (AMXDs) as plug-ins as well.

The Max object wrapping VST and Audio Unit support is called vst~ or mc.vst~, and the
object wrapping Max for Live devices is called amxd~ or mc.amxd~. The object plugin~
is for authoring Max for Live devices, and does not load plug-ins itself.

macOS includes an Audio Unit called AUHighShelfFilter, which Max can load as a plugin to implement that audio
effect.

45

User Guide / Audio / Plugins

Loading a Plugin
If you have a .component or .vst file, you should be able to drop that file onto an unlocked
patcher to load the plug-in. This will automatically create a vst~ object that points to that file.

The left toolbar also provides access to the Plug-in Browser. Clicking on the Plug-ins icon will open
the browser, letting you filter for plug-ins and AMXDs by name and kind.

Max builds the list of plug-ins by scanning for them at launch. In the Plug-ins section, you can use
the Full Scan button to initiate a scan manually, which can be useful if you're adding new plug-ins
with Max open.

46

User Guide / Audio / Plugins

User Interface
When you drop a plug-in into your patcher, the vst~ or amxd~ object will enable the
@viewvisibility attribute and show you a user interface for the plug-in. For an Audio Unit or

VST plug-in, you'll see the generic interface. This lists all of the parameters in the plug-in, and lets
you set their values.

The generic plug-in interface

With Max for Live devices, you'll see the customized user interface for that device.

47

User Guide / Audio / Plugins

The custom user interface for the 'Additive Heaven' Max for Live device

Configuring parameter visibility
In the generic interface, click the pencil icon in the top toolbar to edit parameter visibility. Disable
the Visibility checkbox to hide the parameter from view.

Viewing the native editor
Most VST and Audio Unit plug-ins provide their own user interface. Click on the wrench icon in the
top toolbar to open the native editor.

48

User Guide / Audio / Plugins

The native editor for the AUFilter Audio Unit

Saving and restoring snapshots
You can save the current state of a plug-in as a Snapshot, which will include the current value of all
of the plug-in parameters. Click on the camera icon in the top toolbar to save the current parameter
set to a snapshot. Click on the snapshot selection button in the top-right to list all saved snapshots.

Viewing saved snapshots for the plug-in

The plug-in object UI does not provide any way to edit or delete snaphots. Select the vst~ object
and open the Snapshot Sidebar to edit the names of snapshots, or to delete a snapshot.

49

User Guide / Audio / Plugins

With the vst~ object selected, open the snapshot sidebar to edit snapshots.

Hiding the controls
The @viewvisibility attribute on a vst~ or amxd~ object determines whether or not the object
will show an editable interface in the patcher. By disabling this attribute, you can get a much more
compact representation of the wrapping object.

With @viewvisibility disabled, the object looks like a typical Max signal processing object.

50

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

Polyphony
ddg.mono

51

Using poly

52

Using poly~
Using MC Objects

53
62

Max provides a number of systems for managing polyphony. If you've every played an electric piano
before, the concept of polyphony should be intuitive. When you press multiple keys at the same
time, each key sounds independently, with each note lasting until it fades out, or until each key is
released. However it's accomplished, handling polyphony always involves the same basic tasks:

Routing an input to a specific voice
Managing the independent state of each voice
Deciding whether a particular voice is busy
Muting a voice when it's not in use

ddg.mono
The simplest way to handle polyphony is not to handle polyphony. The ddg.mono object
implements a controller for a monophonic synthesizer with polyphonic input. If you were using a
keyboard input, when pressing a second key, ddg.mono would shift the pitch to the new key, no
longer tracking the first key.

51

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

Using poly
The poly object is a polyphonic voice controller for MIDI note-on and note-off events. When it
receives a note-on event, it assigns that event to the first available voice. When it gets a note-off
event with the same pitch, it marks that voice as no longer in use.

52

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

The poly is a voice controller only. That means that it doesn't manage the voices themselves—it
won't help you turn one oscillator into several. If you want to have multiple voices sounding at the
same time, you should use mutiple patchers, the MC system, or the poly~ object.

Using poly~

53

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

Maybe the "simplest possible" poly~ abstraction patch

The poly~ object combines the voice controller of the poly object with a system for managing
multiple voices. When you load an abstraction into poly~, it will create one copy of that abstraction
for each voice. Then, poly~ gives you the tools to route incoming messages to a specific voice, while
also managing the individual state of each voice.

Viewing voices
Just like other abstractions, you can double-click on a poly~ object to view the patch that it's loaded
as an abstraction. However, since poly~ loads one copy of the abstraction for each voice, you'll also
see a number next to the name of the patch, indicating which voice you're currently looking at.

The number (1) next to ez-synth tells you that you're looking at the first voice.

54

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

You can send poly~ the messge open to view the loaded abstraction for a particular voice. The
messages open 1 will show the first voice, open 2 will show the second voice, and so on.

Event inputs
When poly~ receives a message, it uses one of several systems to determine which voice will
receive that message.

The simplest system uses the @target attribute. When you set the @target attribute to a
particular voice number, all subsequent messages will be routed to that voice. If you set @target 1
, then all messages will be routed to the first voice. Set @target 0 to make all voices the target, in
which case each messages will be copied and sent to each voice.

Messages starting with the symbol note will be automatically routed to the first available voice.
You can tell poly~ when a voice is busy by using the thispoly~ object—see busy state for more
details.

The poly~ object can also handle MIDI note-on and note-off events using the midinote message.
When you send poly~ a message like midinote 60 127 , it will get a free voice and send that noteon event to that voice. When you send poly~ a note-off event like midinote 60 0 , it will find the
voice associated with the pitch 60 and send the note off event to that voice. The poly~ object can
also receive messages with the symbol midievent , like those coming from the rightmost outlet of
the midiparse object. In this case, the system for assigning note-on and note-off events to voices is
the same.

Finally, poly~ is also an MPE-compatible object. Use mpeparse and mpeformat to generate
mpeevent messages, which poly~ will then route to the appropriate voice. The really cool thing

about this approach is that it can manage not only note-on and note-off events, but also polyphonic
aftertouch, pitch bend, and other MPE events.

55

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

When using any of the MIDI-based systems for voice control, you can use the
notemessage message to route events to the voice that has been assigned a particular

MIDI pitch. This is different from using target , which always addresses the voice at a
particular index.

Busy state
In order for poly~ to route note and midinote messages to the right place, it needs to know
when a note is busy. From within a particular poly~ abstraction, use the thispoly~ object to manage
busy state. Send thispoly~ the message 1 to mark the note as busy, and the message 0 to indicate
that the voice is free, and ready to recieve new note or note-on messages.

You can also send thispoly~ a signal, such as the output from adsr~, to mark the voice
as busy/free.

It's extremely common to see an adsr~ connected like this, where it's used both to modulate the signal and to
control the busy state of the poly~ abstraction.

Muting
When a poly~ voice is muted, Max will skip signal processing for any signal-rate objects in that
particular voice. Objects can still pass messages to each other, but no signals will flow between
objects. Muting makes poly~ more efficient, since it won't waste processing power computing silent

56

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

signals for unused voices. This can be especially important when you're working with multiple poly~
objects, or in the context of a custom Max for Live synthesizer.

Since the adsr~ object will also automatically send mute/unmute messages, you'll often see it connected to a
thispoly~

Inlets and outlets
Unlike regular abstractions, poly~ uses the special objects in and out in order to declare inlets and
outlets, and the objects in~ and out~ to declare signal inlets and outlets.

This patcher will have one message inlet and one audio outlet.

Unlike the inlet and outlet objects, these objects take an argument to specify their index. This has
some upside; for example, you can reference the same inlet/outlet in multiple places, and you can

57

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

place the inlet/outlet objects in any left-to-right order that you like.

Two in objects share the index 1, and any messages sent to the first inlet will be received by both these objects.
Also, the [in 2] object will receive messages sent to the second inlet, even though it appears to the left of the [in 1]
object.

There's also a special object polymidiin, specific to poly~. This object receives any messages sent to
poly~ with the midievent symbol, like the ones that come from the rightmost outlet of mpeparse
and midiformat.

58

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

The polymidiin object (not shown but in the simplepolymidi abstraction) works with midiivent messages, like
from mpeparse and midiformat.

Parameters
The poly~ object supports the use of the param object, which lets you define custom attributes on
your poly~ object. You can control these with an attrui object, just like a regular object attribute.
You can set a @min and @max value on your param too, constraining it to a given range. See the
param help file for more information.

59

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

The param defines a custom attribute mod-depth" that can be controlled with an attrui object.

mc.poly~ and mcs.poly~
The poly~ object has two wrappers, mc.poly~ and mcs.poly~. These objects help to bridge the gap
between the mc system and the poly~ object. The mc.poly~ object is maybe the simplest to
understand: it turns each signal input to poly~ into a multichannel input, where the number of
channels is the same as the number of polyphonic voices. Unlike regular poly~, the mc.poly~ object
does not add together the signal output from each voice, but keeps each channel separate.

60

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

The number of channels depends on the number of polyphonic voices of the mc.poly~ object.

The mcs.poly~ object collapses all of the signal inputs and outputs of a poly~ object down to a
single multichannel input and output. The number of input channels and the number of output
channels depends on the number of in~ and out~ objects with different indices in the poly~
abstraction. Each audio input and output will be copied and sent to each polyphonic voice.

61

User Guide / Audio / Polyphony

With mcs.poly~, the number of input and output channels depends on the in~ and out~ objects.

Using MC Objects
The MC wrapper can manage polyphony without the use of the poly~ object. The
mc.noteallocator~ object works of of MIDI note-on and note-off events, similar to how poly~
responds to midinote and midievent messages. There's also the mc.voiceallocator~ object,
which works more like poly~ in response to the note message. For more information, see the
guide on MC Wrapper Polyphony.

62

User Guide / Audio / Recording and Exporting

Recording and Exporting
Recording Audio

63

Recording Video

68

Recording Audio
When it comes to recording the audio output of your patcher, Max tries to give you lots of options
to best fit your needs. Global Record is a simple "one-button" recording option suitable for most
everyday recording. If you need a little bit more control, or you want to record more than two
channels, you can use the Quickrecord extra. For programmatic recording, and for recording more
than eight channels, you can use the sfrecord~ object, or export directly from a buffer~ object.

File formats
Max objects can save audio to aiff , wave , ogg , flac , or raw formats. To record to an mp3 or
an m4a , export your audio from Max, and then process the result. Many programs can compress
and convert audio; ffmpeg is a popular and free tool.

Global Record
When you want to record the output of your patcher, just click the Global Record button in the right
toolbar.

63

User Guide / Audio / Recording and Exporting

This will immediately start recording the first two channels of all patchers to a new audio file. The
Global Record button will change appearance while recording is taking place. If you want to see an
animating red dot, instead of a filled white circle, enable the Global Record Red Button in Max's
recording preferences.

Global Record will record to a folder named Recordings in the Max 9 Folder.

Quickrecord
The Quickrecord extra also records the audio output of the Max application. You can open the
Quickrecord extra by selecting Quickrecord from the Extras menu. Under the hood, this extra
uses the adoutput~ object, which acts as a tap into Max's audio output.

Recording to a directory
By default, Quickrecored will record to a directory. You can press the Choose a directory button to
select which directory Max should record to. When you do, you'll see the menu illuminate under the
Choose a directory button.

64

User Guide / Audio / Recording and Exporting

Every time you press the Record button, Max will add a new recording to the directory that you've
selected. Max will format the name of the recording to reflect the date and time when you started
the recording.

Remember to press the Record button again when you're done to stop the recording.
This is necessary to finalize the audio file.

Recording to a file
Click on the Open a file button to select a file to which you'd like to record. Once you've picked a
file, you'll see the user interface update to show the name of the file that you've chosen. You can

65

User Guide / Audio / Recording and Exporting

click on the illuminated menu under the Open a file button to see where your file will be recorded.

If you start recording again without opening a new file, Max will record over your
original recording.

Multichannel
Quickrecord can record up to eight channels simultaneously. However, by default only the first two
audio channels are enabled. In order to enable the other audio channels for recording, use the drop
down menu under each channel to map each channel from Max to a channel in the recording.

66

User Guide / Audio / Recording and Exporting

Each channel strip in the Quickrecord view represents a different channel in the recorded audio file.
Using the menus in each channel strip, you can map an audio output from Max to each recorded
channel. The default configuration maps output channel 1 to recording channel 1, and output
channel 2 to recording channel 2. Set any channel to Off to disable recording to that channel.

Using sfrecord~
The sfrecord~ object (and the mc.sfrecord~ object) is the programmatic interface to recording in
Max. Each sfrecord~ object can record up to 64 channels at once, and multiple sfrecord~ objects
can be active at the same time.

67

User Guide / Audio / Recording and Exporting

Using buffer~
The record~ object can record directly to the contents of a buffer~ object, letting you record to
memory in Max without saving your audio to disk. You can also use the poke~ object to write
samples directly into a buffer~. Either way, after getting samples into a buffer~, you can send
buffer~ a write messages to save the contents of the buffer to disk.

Recording Video
For a full discussion of video recording, see this Jitter documentation on Recording Video.

68

User Guide / Audio / RNBO

RNBO
RNBO is a visual, graph-based programming language. Similar to Gen, RNBO runs in a special Max
object called rnbo~, a subpatcher with its own family of objects based off of Max objects.

RNBO objects in a rnbo~ object

Anything you make in a RNBO subpatcher can be exported, to hardware and software targets like
Raspberry Pi, VST and Audio Unit plugins. You can also export to C++ and JavaScript code for use in
custom desktop applications and Web Audio contexts.

Most RNBO objects are designed to work the same as their Max counterparts. So if you're familiar
with Max, it should be easy to work with RNBO. Gen also works inside of RNBO, which means you
can embed your Gen work in a RNBO patcher and export it from Max. Other RNBO features
include sample accurate events, host transport sync, MPE & MIDI support, automatic polyphony,
and Ableton Link support.

RNBO is a paid add-on to Max. There are several resources available online if you'd like to learn
more about RNBO.

69

User Guide / Audio / RNBO

Resource

Description

RNBO Website

Main RNBO website

RNBO Guides

RNBO documentation and tutorials

RNBO
Examples

RNBO in context, and examples of using RNBO

RNBO Objects

Object reference for RNBO namespace objects

RNBO C++ API

Programming interface reference to link RNBO-exported code in a C++ app

RNBO JS API

Programming interface reference to link RNBO-exported code in a JavaScript
app

70

User Guide / Audio / Sample Accurate Messages

Sample Accurate Messages
Sample-accurate Events to Audio
Signals to Sample-accurate Events

71
72

When Overdrive and Scheduler in Audio Interrupt are enabled, certain signal-rate objects can
handle high-priority events without losing timing accuracy. In other words, these objects are
sample-accurate when handling high-priority events.

As a reminder, high-priority or scheduled events come from MIDI objects, or from timing releted
objects like metro, pipe, and delay. Most other objects generate low-priority events, including UI
events like clicking on a button or dragging a slider.

Low-priority events never have any timing information to begin with, so it doesn't make
sense to talk about handling them with sample accuracy.

Sample-accurate Events to Audio
With Scheduler in Audio Interrupt enabled, Max handles a chunk of message events before
processing each signal vector. For example, when the signal vector size is 256 samples, the
scheduler will handle all events scheduled within the next 5.8 milliseconds (equivalent to 256
samples at 44.1 kHz) before Max processes each signal vector.

This is what makes sample-accurate events possible. With SIAI on, signal-rate objects can handle
high-priority events at the appropriate time within each audio processing block. As an example,
consider a sig~ receiving the messages 0. , 0.3 , and 0.6 . When SIAI is disabled, sig~ can only
handle these messages once per audio block, which destroys the original timing information. With
SIAI enabled, precise timing information is preserved, even when converting from message-rate to
signal-rate.

71

User Guide / Audio / Sample Accurate Messages

On the left, Scheduler in Audio Interrupt is disabled, and sig~ must collapse together all the events received during
the same audio block. On the right, SIAI is enabled, and sig~ can preserve timing information.

Objects that convert scheduled events to sample-accurate signals
sig~ will convert events to audio signals sample-accurately
click~ will start an impulse sample-accurately when it receives a scheduled bang
line~ and curve~ will start a function sample-accurately
vst~ receives MIDI events sample-accurately

Signals to Sample-accurate Events
Signal-rate objects that output events can generate sample-accurate, scheduled events when
Scheduler in Audio Interrupt is enabled. For example, a snapshot~ object will output the value of an
incoming signal at a specified rate. When SIAI is disabled, snapshot~ can only use the first audio
sample in each signal vector, and the effective resolution is limited by the signal vector size. With
SIAI enabled, snapshot~ can generate multiple events per signal vector, and those events maintain
precise timing information.

72

User Guide / Audio / Sample Accurate Messages

With Scheduler in Audio Interrupt enabled, scheduled events are handled before each
audio vector is processed. So, events generated by snapshot~ are always delayed by
exactly one signal vector. However, their relative timing information is still preserved
accurately.

On the left, SIAI is disabled, and snapshot~ and sig~ lose all of the information in the original signal. On the right,
with SIAI enabled, snapshot~ and sig~ can actually work together to accurately downsample the signal.

Signal objects that support sample-accurate events
snapshot~ will sample incoming audio and generate events sample-accurately
peakamp~ will record peaks in the incoming signal and generate events sample-accurately
edge~ outputs the zero-to-non-zero signal transitions sample-accurately
line~ and curve~ output their "done" bang event sample-accurately
spike~ outputs the time between audio events sample-accurately
what~ outputs detected signal values sample-accurately
subdiv~ outputs step values sample-accurately

73

User Guide / Colors

Colors

74

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Color Palette
Displaying the Color Palette

75

Picking a Fixed Color
Managing Color Collections in Palettes

77
78

Using Dynamic Colors

79

Using the Dynamic Color Picker
Exploring Other Color Sets and Themes

79
81

Using the Color Picker

84

Copying and Pasting Colors

84

The color palette lets you select and edit colors used by Max objects. There are two types of colors
used in Max, fixed and dynamic. Fixed colors are specified by RGB color values -- for example, black
is 0, 0, 0 -- while dynamic colors are specified by name, and may change dynamically when the Max
or Live theme changes.

You can use the color palette to select either fixed and dynamic colors. Certain color attributes in
Max objects can also be specified as gradients -- continuous transitions between two fixed colors.

Displaying the Color Palette
The color palette can be accessed in two places, the Inspector or the Format Palette.

Colors in the Inspector
With a user interface object such as a button or toggle selected, open the Inspector. You'll see some
color attributes:

Click any of the color swatches next to the name of the attribute. The Color Palette will open.

75

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Colors in the Format Palette
Select a user interface object, then click the format palette icon in the top toolbar.

The format palette will open. Click any of the colors shown, and the color palette will drop down to
edit that color.

76

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Picking a Fixed Color
Select the Fixed tab at the top of the color palette if it is not already showing.

The top control shows the current color within a hue space.

The middle control shows the current color within a brightness and saturation space. Click and/or
drag in either space to modify the current color. The Max object's color changes as you drag.

Below the color editors, you'll find some variation controls. By default, the chosen variation is mix
with black. When you click on mix with black, you'll see a menu with other color variations.

77

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Here's Pentad, which creates five variations of the selected color according to hue.

Click on any color variant to make it the selected color.

If you're not happy with your changes, choose Undo from the Edit menu to go back to the
previously chosen color.

Managing Color Collections in Palettes
Below the color variation control, there is a 10 x 3 grid of squares. By default, the grid is empty,
ready for you to save your own colors. As you move the mouse over an empty square, a plus sign
appears. Click in a square to save the current color in a palette.

To save the current color over an existing color, hold down the shift key and click on the color you
want to replace.

78

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

There are three user palettes for storing your own color collections. You don't need to save changes
to the palette; the updated colors will be loaded every time you launch Max.

Saving Palettes
To export the current state of a user palette for sharing, click on the current palette name (
user palette 1 for example), then choose Export user palette 1... from the menu. Files are saved

with the extension .maxpalette .

Built-in Palettes
The palette menu beneath the grid lists about a dozen read-only paletes built into Max. Choosing a
named palette will replace the colors in the grid.

Importing Palettes
To import previously exported palette, choose Import... from the palette menu and select the
desired .maxpalette file.

Using Dynamic Colors
Dynamic colors are named elements of color themes you can use to ensure the user interface
elements in your patchers or Max for Live devices are coordinated with the larger environment.
When the user changes the theme, dynamic colors update to reflect the color values in the theme.

The live.dial object as well as other UI objects whose names begin with live use dynamic colors
within a Live theme so'll they'll fit in with the rest of the Live UI. You can assign dynamic colors to
any object however.

Using the Dynamic Color Picker
Click on the Dynamic tab of the color palette.

If the current color is already dynamic, it will be highlighted within its color set (for example, Max
Theme Colors). If the current color is fixed, the Live Theme Colors will be shown. As you mouse over

79

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

the grid of colors, you'll see the color name displayed above the grid. Click on a color to choose it.

If you prefer to choose the dynamic color by name, click on the name above the grid to see a menu
of all colors in the set by name.

About Live Colors
There are about 70 entries in the set of Live Theme Colors. The menu can be a bit overwhelming, so
it can help to learn the most commonly used colors in objects. live.dial makes use of 11 colors of
which the following are significant:

Control Range On -- the range of the control when active
Control Range Off -- the range of the control when inactive
Control On or Control On Variant -- the control's value when active
Control Off -- the control's value when inactive
Border Color (Focus) -- the border around the control when it has keyboard focus
Control Needle On -- the control needle when active
Control Needle Off -- the control need when inactive
Text Color -- the text color

80

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Many of the other theme colors in the menu are used in the Live UI for indicating selection or a
special modes, so they could potentially be confusing if used for controls in a UI.

Exploring Other Color Sets and Themes
To choose another set of dynamic colors, click Live Theme Colors and choose a set from the menu.

Most of the time you'll want to use either Live Theme Colors or Max Theme Colors; these two items
appear at the top of the menu. The other sets represent different colors used in the Max interface.
For example, Max Console is the collection of colors used to display text and backgrounds in the
Max Console.

Using Gradients
A small number of Max user interface object background colors can be specified as gradients. The
background of a message box is one example. The Gradient editor in the color panel is only
available if the color you're editing can be a gradient.

To use the gradient editor:

81

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Make a new message box
Show the inspector for the message box
Click on the color swatch for Background Color to edit it. The color palette is in gradient
mode.

The gradient editor has three components. First, you can change either of the two colors that make
up the gradient using the active edit color selection:

Second, you can edit the gradient parameters by clicking on the pencil icon.

The gradient editor will appear.

82

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

The following animation demonstrates the basic operation of the gradient editor, setting the
gradient angle, the blend point, and the size of the blend region.

With gradient compatible background color attributes, you're not obligated to use a gradient.

To switch to a solid color, click on Gradient and choose Color Fill from the menu.

83

User Guide / Colors / Color Palette

Using the Color Picker
A final option for editing fixed colors is the standard Color Picker accessed by clicking the circular
color icon near the top of the color palette.

Copying and Pasting Colors
To moving color values from the color palette to other applications, click # above the color grid.

You can Copy the current color to the clipboard in either hex (Copy Hex Value) or float (Copy Float
Value).

To import a color value into the color palette from another application, choose Paste. The color
palette accepts values as four floating-point numbers or a hex string, which can optionally be
preceded by a pound sign ( AEFC06 or #AEFC06 ).

84

User Guide / Colors / Color Themes

Color Themes
Choosing a Color Theme

85

Custom Color Themes

86

Designing Robust Patcher Interfaces
Themes and Max for Live

86
87

Accessing Theme Colors from JavaScript

87

Color Theme Format

88

A Max Color Theme defines the colors of elements of the Max user interface, like the toolbar color,
as well as default values for object color attributes. You can choose the color theme that you like
best, or define your own custom color theme.

Note that a Max Style will take precedence over the current theme, if a custom style is set.

Choosing a Color Theme
You can change the colors of the Max interface by choosing a new theme. In the application
preferences (Max > Preferences...), under the Interface the Color Theme option lets you select your
preferred theme.

85

User Guide / Colors / Color Themes

Max ships with several color themes, including light and dark themes, as well as themes from
previous versions of Max.

clockwise from top left: light, midlight-steel, default, dark-lazurite

Custom Color Themes
If you want to create a custom Max theme, it must be part of a Max Package. Create a custom
theme by creating a .maxtheme file, then placing that file in the interfaces/themes directory
inside your package folder. Max will automatically make your custom theme available alongside the
built-in themes in the application preferences.

The easiest way to make a custom color theme is to start from one of the existing themes. On
macOS these can be found in the application bundle—right-click on the Max application, select
"Show Package Contents" and navigate to
Contents > Resources > C74 > interfaces > themes . On Windows these can be found in
Program Files > Cycling '74 > Max 8 > Resources > interfaces > themes .

Designing Robust Patcher Interfaces

86

User Guide / Colors / Color Themes

If you want to share your patches with other people, you should take the time to make sure that
your patches are theme-aware. There are simple guidelines that you can follow if you want your
patch to look good, even when the user switches between themes. This is especially important if
you're trying to share a Max for Live device, as that device will follow whatever theme Live uses.

In order to make a patcher properly themed for Ableton (or Max) and robust in regard to theme
changes, one of the following options should be followed for each UI element in your device (or
patch):

Use the default colors for all of a given UI element's colors. This should always follow the
theme according to default theming behavior. If you require always dark or always light
colors, please use appropriate dynamic colors that match these needs (see option #2).
Use appropriate dynamic colors for all colors in any given UI element. This is especially
important for any foreground and background colors. This allows for robust theme
following, with different rules than the standard theme following behavior.
Use fixed custom colors for all colors in any given UI element. This is especially important
for any foreground and background colors. In this case, the colors will not adapt based on
themes, but they will always use the authored colors and look the same under all themes.

Themes and Max for Live
The Max preference Follow Live Theme determines whether Max will update its own theme when
the Live application changes themes. By default this preference is On. An individual user who
wishes to retain legacy theme behavior, can turn this setting Off. And for Max users that wish for
the last used Live theme to persist when using Max without having been launched via the Max for
Live edit button, may set this preference to Persist.

It is generally not recommended to change the Max theme while running as the Max for Live editor
with Follow Live Theme set to On or Persist. This leads to a confusing fight between custom Max
themes and the Live theme being followed. If you find yourself in this situation. It is recommended
to quit and restart Max (or simply change the theme in Live), to restore expected behavior. In
general for testing Max for Live devices with Light and Dark themes, it is recommended to have
Follow Live Theme set to On and to change the theme inside Live.

Accessing Theme Colors from JavaScript

87

User Guide / Colors / Color Themes

Inside a JavaScript object like v8, v8ui, or v8.codebox, you can access theme colors using the
max.getcolor() function. For example, max.getcolor(“live_lcd_bg”) will return the color

associated with LCD Background color. If you're using this color with a custom UI object, it's
recommended to fetch this color in your paint() method. Since paint() is called automatically
whenever the theme changes, this guaranetees that your paint() function will always be called
with up-to-date colors from the current theme.

Color Theme Format
A Max color theme is a set of Dynamic Colors combined with default values for the current Style.
Together, these two sets of values define colors for the Max application as well as Max objects.

The .maxtheme file is simply a JSON file with two properties, colors and styledefaults . The
colors property defines the values of Dynamic Colors within that color theme. This is a dictionary

that maps identifiers to specific color values. When the application needs to know what color to
draw a UI element, it can look in this dictionary to see what color would be consistent with the
current theme.

88

User Guide / Colors / Color Themes

// Example of the "colors" section of a .maxtheme file
{
"colors" : [
{
"id" : "alignmentguide", // The internal name of the color
"oncolor" : [ 0.737255, 0.466667, 0.219608, 1.0 ], // RGBA format
"category" : "Patching",
"label" : "Alignment Guide" // The display name of the color
},
{
"id" : "assistance_background",
"oncolor" : [ 0.843137, 0.835294, 0.796078, 0.94 ],
"category" : "Patching",
"label" : "Assistance Background"
}
// ... more colors here
]
}

The styledefaults are similar, but work with the current Style to determine the final color of an
object. These specify the default color of an object if no other color is defined.

// Exmaple of the "styledefaults" section of a .maxtheme file
{
"styledefaults" :
{
"bgcolor" : [ 0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 1 ],
"color" : [ 0.807843, 0.898039, 0.909804, 1 ],
"elementcolor" : [ 0.34902, 0.34902, 0.34902, 1 ],
"accentcolor" : [ 0.501961, 0.501961, 0.501961, 1 ],
// ... more colors here
}
}

89

User Guide / Colors / Color Themes

If an object needs to decide what color to draw, it first looks to its defined attibutes. For example, if
a button object needs to draw its background, it looks to its bgcolor attribute. If the user has
not defined a custom value for this color, it then looks at the object's style for a value for that color.
If the style doesn't contain a value for that attribute, the object checks the patcher's style next. If
the patcher doesn't have a style, or if the style doesn't define a color for the given attribute name,
then the object will fetch the value from the current global color theme—this is what is specified by
styledefaults .

90

User Guide / Colors / Dynamic Colors

Dynamic Colors
Max for Live

91

Selecting a Dynamic Color

91

Limitations

94

Dynamic Colors automatically follow the active Max color theme, rather than remainining fixed. An
object or a patcher can have a Fixed Color, like 1.0, 0.0, 1.0, 1.0 , which will not change when
the current Color Theme changes. However, a color can also be specified by name. In this case, the
actual color as it appears on screen is dynamic, and will change when the current color theme
changes. You can get and set colors in the current theme using the themecolor object.

Max for Live
By default, dynamic colors are disabled for most Max objects, but are enabled for most Max for Live
objects. When used in Max for Live, the dynamic colors of the Live category follow the active Live
color theme as chosen in Live's Preferences. The Live dynamic colors and their values are also listed
in the live.colors object's help patcher.

Selecting a Dynamic Color
Using the Inspector
To set a dynamic color, open the Inspector for an object and find the color attribute you want to
change. Click in the value column to open the color picker. Select the Dynamic tab at the top of the
color picker.

91

User Guide / Colors / Dynamic Colors

Click the drop-down menu above the color swatch. From here you can select a color based on its
dynamic color name. The first dropdown groups colors by category (e.g. Max Theme Colors, Inlet +
Outlet), while the second dropdown lets you pick a specific color.

Hold alt (Windows) or Option (macOS) while clicking the dropdown to display the
full range of available dynamic colors.

92

User Guide / Colors / Dynamic Colors

Dynamic color picker showing the colors for Inlets + Outlets

Using a Message
Send an object a message like elementcolor "Hot Inlet Circle Color" to set the value of that
attribute to a dynamic color. Since the name of a dynamic color might be multiple words, you may
need to enclose the name of the dynamic color in quotes.

Someone set the elementcolor of this slider to be the same as a hot inlet.

93

User Guide / Colors / Dynamic Colors

A full overview of all Dynamic colors and their names can be found in the "view all" tab
of the themecolor object help patcher.

Limitations
Dynamic colors do not work with styles. Choosing a style to override a color will not shut off
dynamic colors, and dynamic colors can not yet reliably be part of a style.

94

User Guide / Colors / Format Palette

Format Palette
Opening the Format Palette

95

Patcher-level Formatting

96

Styles

96

The format palette is a specialized interface for customizing the look of your patcher. It lets you
change object and patch cord colors, font size and style, syntax highlighting colors, and other
attributes related to appearance. The format palette can configure specific objects, or it can apply
patcher-level formatting, affecting all objects in the current patcher.

Opening the Format Palette
Open the format palette by clicking the Format icon in the top toolbar.

Click the Format icon to expose the format palette.

Along the top of the format palette, you'll see all of the configuration options for the current
selection. Hover over a configuration option to see the name of the option.

Hover over a format option to see its name.

95

User Guide / Colors / Format Palette

Patcher-level Formatting
With no objects or patch cords selected, the format palette shows patcher-level formatting options.
Any change you make here will apply to all objects in the current patcher, unless those objects
override those changes with individual settings.

Patcher-level formatting for the Object Accent Color changes the style of all objects in the patcher, except for those
with individual settings.

You can hide patcher-level formatting options by clicking the Hide Patcher-Level
Format icon in the top-left.

Patcher-level formatting can be used to change the syntax highlighting for the current patcher, with
options to change the color for object names, arguments, attributes, and attribute arguments.

If a configuration option is missing from the format palette, you may need to expand
the size of the window to make room for more options.

Styles

96

User Guide / Colors / Format Palette

The format palette can be used to apply, create, and modify styles. See the Styles guide for an indepth discussion.

97

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Styles
Applying a Style to Objects

98

Applying a Style to a Patcher

99

Accessing Style Colors from JavaScript

100

Creating a New Style

101

Removing a Style from an Object

103

Adding a Style to your Library
Removing a Style from your Library

104
105

Modifying a Style

107

A Style is a collection of colors and fonts used by Max user interface objects. You can apply a style
to a Max patcher as a whole or to an individual object. A patcher-level style establishes defaults for
colors and/or fonts that can be overridden by styles or colors applied to individual objects. You can
define your own personal library of styles or make use of "factory styles" that come with Max. You
can also use styles in connection with Max templates to create your own unique default patching
environment.

Styles are created and managed using the Format palette.

Applying a Style to Objects
Select any number of objects, then click the Format button to open up the Format palette toolbar.

Click on the style menu in the top toolbar to to show the available styles.

98

User Guide / Colors / Styles

The style menu lets you choose from styles you have created and added to your own Max library
(available using the Library entry), styles recently used in the current patcher (which will be listed
just below the Library entry), or from Max Factory Styles (located at the bottom of the menu).
Choose any of these styles from the pull-down menu. The menu will display the current style, and
that style will be applied to your objects.

Applying a Style to a Patcher
It's also possible to apply a patcher-level style. A patcher-level style establishes default colors and
fonts for new objects. To apply a style to the whole patcher, first make sure no object is selected by
clicking in the background of the current patcher, then click on the Format button to open the
Format palette toolbar.

99

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Once more, click on the style menu on the left-hand side of the toolbar to show the style menu.

Choose a style to apply a patcher-level style. If an object is using its default colors and fonts, the
patcher-level style will replace the default values. This lets you change the look of a whole patcher
at once.

Accessing Style Colors from JavaScript
Inside a JavaScript object like v8, v8ui, or v8.codebox, you can access style colors using the
associated properties on the this.patcher object. For example, this.patcher.bgcolor will

100

User Guide / Colors / Styles

return the background color defined in the currently active style (or inhereted from the current
theme, if no style is active). If you're using this color with a custom UI object, it's recommended to
fetch this color in your paint() method. Since paint() is called automatically whenever the
style changes, this guaranetees that your paint() function will always be called with up-to-date
colors from the current style.

Creating a New Style
In the same way that you can apply a style either to a selection of objects, or at the patcher level,
you can also create a style in the same way. In general, it's easiest to create a style based on a
selection of objects.

Select the object (or objects) that you'd like to use as the basis of your new style, then click on the
Format button to open up the Format palette toolbar. Configure the object as you want it to appear
in your new style, then click on the style drop down and select Define New Style.

This will open a dialog box that lets you name your new style.

101

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Attributes included in a style
Not all attributes that affect the appearance of an object can be included in a style. It's easy to see
which attributes will be included by looking at the format palette, which shows all the attributes
that can participate in a style. By clicking on each icon in the toolbar, you can see the name of each
attribute, as well as the name of the color theme value that affects that attribute. For example, a
button object has an attribute called outlinecolor , and from the format palette you can see that
this is affected by the color theme value elementcolor . This helps you see how the style of one
object can apply to multiple objects, when creating a style from a single object.

102

User Guide / Colors / Styles

It's also important to note that a style will only include attributes that you've changes
from their default. If you leave an attribute at its default value, then any style defined
from that object will not include that value.

Single-object styles
When using a single object to define a style, Max will use the color theme value of a particular
attribute to determine how to style other objects based on the original objects. Using the example
of a button object, since the outlinecolor attribute is affected by the color theme value
elementcolor , the outlinecolor of a button will affect the "Off Color" of a slider object with

the same theme.

In the above, the appearance of the slider with the style "button-based-style" is determined by the
appearance of the button.

Multi-object styles
When using multiple objects to define a style, Max will only apply the style to objects of the same
class as the original objects. If you define a new style based on a button and a slider, then buttons
will have the same appearance as the button, and sliders will have the same appearance as the
slider, but other objects will be unaffected.

Removing a Style from an Object
103

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Select the object, then open the style menu and select "Clear Style".

Adding a Style to your Library
A Library Style is dependency-free, saved to disk, and does not rely on any other styles.

To add a Library Style, click on an empty section of a patcher, then click on the Format
Button to open the Format palette toolbar. Select the style for your patcher that you want
to save to the Library.
Click on the style menu and choose Copy <style name> to Library from the pull-down
menu.

104

User Guide / Colors / Styles

The style you have selected will now appear in the Library tab of the Style menu

Library styles can be found at ~/Documents/Max 8/Styles on a macOS, and
%HOMEPATH%\Documents\Max 8\Styles on a Windows system.

Removing a Style from your Library

105

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Click on an empty section of a patcher, then click on the Format Button to open the Format
palette toolbar.
Click on the style menu on the left-hand side of the Format palette toolbar and hover over
the Library menu entry. This will display all of the styles you have added to the Library.
Click on the deletion button to remove a specific style.

To remove all styles that are not being used in a patcher, select Remove Unused Styles from
the style menu. This will removed all unsed styles that may have been inherited from
copying and pasting a different user's patcher, or opening a different user's patcher on your
machine.

106

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Modifying a Style
Click on an empty section of a patcher, then click on the Format Button to open the Format
palette toolbar. Use the Format palette to make your desired changes to the object. When
you do, you will notice that a plus sign appears alongside the current style in the style menu
to indicate that the style has been changed.

Click on the style menu on the left-hand side of the Format palette toolbar. Making changes
in an object with a style applied to it will enable several menu options in the pull-down
menu.

107

User Guide / Colors / Styles

Choose Redefine to redefine the current style to match your changes.
Choose Revert to revert to the style you originally applied to the object.
Choose Rename to rename the style you originally applied to the object. When you choose
this option, the style dialog will appear. Type in the name of your style. When you hit a
carriage return, the style will be created and be added to a list of patcher styles.
Choose Clear Style to return the attributes of the object to their default state (precisely as if
you had selected Set to Default Values from Max's Object menu).

108

User Guide / Colors / Syntax Coloring

Syntax Coloring
Enabling Object Box Syntax Coloring

109

Customizing Object Box Syntax Colors

111

Syntax Coloring uses different colors for a word or number based on the type of token it is in a
programming or data description language. Most modern text editors used for programming feature
syntax coloring and Max is no exception. The standard text window will adjust text colors based on
the theme and file type. Here are some examples:

JavaScript in the **default** theme

Dictionary Editor in the midlight-ash theme

Enabling Object Box Syntax Coloring
To apply syntax coloring to the text in object boxes in a patcher, enable Syntax Coloring in the
Color and Theme tab of the Preferences window.

109

User Guide / Colors / Syntax Coloring

This applies the current theme's syntax colors to object box text.

In the above example, four colors are used to color the text of object boxes.

the first word in the object box is the object name

words starting with @ are attribute names

110

User Guide / Colors / Syntax Coloring

words or numbers after the object name but before the typed-in attributes are object
arguments

words or numbers after the object name but before the typed-in attributes are attribute
arguments

Customizing Object Box Syntax Colors
You can override object box syntax colors set by themes in two ways:

Select a Syntax Color Theme other than Theme Default in the Color and Theme tab of the
Preferences window.

111

User Guide / Colors / Syntax Coloring

The various themes in the menu will not be equally legible with all themes, but they may work
better for you than the default theme colors. Here's the olivia Syntax Color Theme used with the
default Color Theme.

Note that Syntax Color Themes typically change only the four object box text colors, not the text
editing window colors.

On a per-patcher basis, you can edit the four object box syntax colors in the Format Palette
for the patcher. With no objects in the patcher selected, show the Format Palette and click
the P icon at the far left.

The Format Palette shows the default object, background, and text colors for the patcher. You'll
want to locate the four A icons to the edit the syntax colors, Syntax Attribute Argument Color,
Syntax Attribute Name Color, Syntax Object Argument Color, and Syntax Object Name Color.

It's helpful to edit these colors with object boxes showing the various syntax elements in the
patcher visible.

112

User Guide / Colors / Syntax Coloring

Once changed, the customized colors will apply to all object boxes in a patcher (but not its
subpatchers). To apply your customized colors more easily to new patchers, you can save the
patcher as a template.

To apply the syntax colors to existing patchers, define a patcher-level style. Choose Define New
Style from the Style menu in the Format Palette when editing the patcher fonts and colors.

113

User Guide / Data

Data

114

User Guide / Data / Arrays

Arrays
When to Use Arrays

115

Creating an Array

115

Editing Arrays
Named Arrays

115
116

Converting to and from a List

117

Arrays and Dictionaries

119

JavaScript

119

Arrays are a data type in Max. Similar to lists, arrays store multiple items in order. Unlike lists, which
are limited to storing numbers and symbols, arrays can store other Max data structures including
strings, dictionaries, and other arrays. Similar to dictionaries and strings, arrays are stored in
memory by name. Generally, arrays are a more powerful version of lists.

When to Use Arrays
Creating an Array
Create an array with the array object. Initialize the contents of the array by including the initial
values as object arguments.

Editing Arrays
Edit an array in place by using the append, clear, delete, insert, prepend, and replace messages.

115

User Guide / Data / Arrays

Objects that modify arrays as they pass through them, like array.rotate , don't change the
original array, but create a new array with the result of their computation. In this example, the
objects on the left always output the same result, but the objects on the right will update the
original array with every rotation.

Named Arrays
Like dictionaries and strings, arrays always have a unique name. By default, the name will simply be
a randomly generated unique identifier. You can also assign a name to an array using the @name
attribute.

116

User Guide / Data / Arrays

An array is identified by its unique name, so you can access the same array from any array object
with the same name.

Converting to and from a List
Any list sent to an array object will automatically be converted to an array. When it comes to
working with arrays and lists, many objects will use arrays and lists interchangeably. However, in
some circumstances, you might need to use a list and not an array. In these cases, you can use the
array.tolist object to convert an array into a list.

117

User Guide / Data / Arrays

If the array contains structured data, like dictionaries or other arrays, converting to a list will not
unpack the contents of any structured data object. Instead, the list will simply contain a symbol
representation of the object.

If your array contains only numbers, symbols/strings, and other arrays, you can use the object
array.flatten to collect all sub-arrays and their contents into one long array. This can then pass
through the array.tolist object to return a simple representation of your array's contents.

118

User Guide / Data / Arrays

Arrays and Dictionaries
Dictionaries can contain arrays, and arrays can contain dictionaries. Printing an array containing a
dictionary will output a JSON representation of the dictionary.

JavaScript
Use the MaxArray class to create a JavaScript reference to a Max Array. You can give it an initial
value by passing a list or Array value to the constructor. Update the value of the array by calling
.set .

var max_arr = new MaxArray(1, 2, "three", 4.0);
max_arr.set(10, 9, "eight", 7.0); // update the array contents

By setting the name property of the MaxArray , you can refer to a Array defined in the parent
patcher.

119

User Guide / Data / Arrays

var max_arr = new MaxArray();
max_arr.name = "frith"; // Now the MaxArray refers to an array named
"frith"
max_arr.set(2, 4, "six", 8); // Updates the array in the containing patcher

If you want to manipulate the Array value, call .stringify and JSON.parse to turn the Max
Array into a JavaScript Array. From there, you can use regular JavaScript array manipulation
functions. To convert back, use JSON.stringify and .parse .

var max_arr = new MaxArray();
max_arr.set(2, "3", "four", 6);
var js_arr = JSON.parse(max_arr.stringify()); // retrieve the value as a
JS string, convert to Array
post(JSON.stringify(js_arr) + '\n'); // prints "[2, '3', 'four', 6]"
js_arr[1] = 3;
max_arr.parse(JSON.stringify(js_arr));
post(max_arr.stringify() + '\n'); // prints "[2, 3, 'four', 6]"

To send a Max Array out of an outlet defined in JavaScript, send the string "array" followed by the
name of the array.

function bang() {
var arr = new MaxArray();
arr.parse("[I, got, a, bang]");
outlet(0, "array", arr.name);
}

120

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

Dictionaries
When to Use Dictionaries

121

Working with Dictionaries

122

Editing a Dictionary

122

Abbreviated Dictionary Syntax
JavaScript

125
126

A Dictionary is a container for data organized into key-value pairs. A key is always a symbol, but the
value can be anything, including a number, symbol, list, or even another dictionary. You can create
and manage dictionaries using the dict object, and the associated family of dictionary manipulation
objects. Like arrays and strings, dictionaries have names and can be passed between objects with
messages like dictionary u12345678 .

For developers, a dictionary is most similar to a JSON object, and there are convenience functions
in the API for converting a dictionary to a JSON string, as well as updating the contents of a
dictionary with JSON.

When to Use Dictionaries
Dictionaries are useful for working with structured data, especially when that data has a hierarchical
or labeled format. Imagine you were trying to simulate a large number of agents, each one modeling
a simple creature with some kind of behavior. The state of each creature might look something like
the following.

{
"position": {
"x": 2,
"y": 5
},
"mood": "nostalgic"
}

121

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

With a dictionary, the values of your object not only have a place in a hierarchy, they also have
labels.

Working with Dictionaries
Create a new dictionary using the dict object. The argument for the dict object is the unique name
for the dictionary. If you do not give the dictionary a name, Max will generate a unique name
automatically. Two dict objects with the same name will reference the same dictionary.

Dictionary basics

If you use a message object to display a string, you'll see the actual values that pass between Max
objects when sending a dictionary in a message. In a message, a dictionary is represented by the
symbol dictionary , followed by the unique name of the dictionary.

Editing a Dictionary
Edit the contents of a dictionary by double-clicking on a dict object, or by sending the dict object
the edit message. This will open a text editor for modifying the contents of a dictionary.

122

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

Dictionary editing

Dictionaries can be edited using JSON syntax (except that dictionaries don't support boolean (
true / false ) values). Keys must be strings, enclosed in quotation marks. Values can be numbers,
strings, arrays (denoted with square brackets) or dictionaries (denoted by curly braces). Since the
entire structure is itself a dictionary, curly braces must enclose the whole dictionary expression.

By sending the export message to the dict object, you can write the contents of a dictionary to a
file, in either JSON or YAML format. Using the import message, you can then read such a file into
a dict object.

pattr and pattrstorage
The pattr and pattrstorage objects will store the contents of a dictionary. Because a dictionary is
not a simple numeric value, you can't interpolate between dictionary values using floating-point
values for recall . However, in other respects, dictionaries are fully compatible with pattr and
pattrstorage.

123

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

Dictionaries and pattr

Getting and setting values
Dictionaries can have nested dictionaries as values, and can contain array values an well. To simplify
accessing nested elements within a dictionary, Max dictionary objects use a double-colon syntax.

{
"farm" :
{
"age": 101,
"animals" : [ "sheep", "chicken", "cow" ],
"crops" : [ "corn", "peas" ]
}
}

Given a dictionary with the above contents, you can use the get or set messages to access
values in the dictionary. Use a double-colon :: to access a nested dictionary by its key, and use
brackets [] to access elements in an array.

124

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

Convert a message to a signal without any smoothing

Abbreviated Dictionary Syntax
Dictionaries can be serialized to JSON, or initialized from a JSON string. However, dictionaries can
also be parsed from a special abbreviated dictionary syntax, consisting of keys and values separated
by a single colon. The following JavaScript code demonstrates initializing the same dictionary in two
different ways.

125

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

let serial1 = `cow : 1 sheep : 2`;
let serial2 = `{ "cow": 1, "sheep": 2 }`;
let d1 = new Dict();
d1.parse(serial1);
let d2 = new Dict();
d2.parse(serial2);
// Dictionaries are the same

Initializing a dictionary with abbreviated dictionary syntax

JavaScript
Use the Dict class to create a JavaScript reference to a Max Dictionary. The name of the
dictionary will be the first argument to the constructor, or an automatically generated unique name
if none is provided. If the js object is in a patcher that contains a dictionary with the same name,
then the js Dict object and the Max dict object refer to the same dictionary. Modifying the
contents of one will change the contents of the other.

126

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

var max_dict = new Dict("mydict");

To manipulate the contents of the dictionary, use the get and set methods.

max_dict.set("color", "red");
console.log(max_dict.get("color")); // prints "red"

The parse method can initialize the contents of a dictionary using a JavaScript JSON serialization.
This is a useful way to convert a JavaScript object to a Max dictionary.

let obj = {x: 1, y: 2};
let serial = JSON.stringify(obj);
max_dict.parse(serial); // dictionary now has the keys x and y with values
1 and 2

To receive a dictionary in a JavaScript function, define a function named dictionary . The first
argument to this function will be the name of the dictionary.

function dictionary(dict_name) {
var myDict = new Dict(dict_name); // now "myDict" links to the passed-in
string.
}

To send a Max dictionary out of an outlet defined in JavaScript, send the symbol "dictionary"
followed by the name of the dictionary.

127

User Guide / Data / Dictionaries

function bang() {
var myDict = new Dict();
myDict.set("wood", "balsa");
outlet(0, "dictionary", myDict.name);
}

128

User Guide / Data / Integers and Floats

Integers and Floats
Integers and Floats in Max

129

Technical Details

131

Gen + RNBO

131

Max is fairly strict about how it deals with integer and floating point numbers. At a low level,
integers and floats are two of the fundamental data types that objects can pass between each
other, and many objects will handle the two data types differently.

Integers and Floats in Max
Integers are whole numbers, while floats can represent values with a decimal component. In Max,
many objects operate in either a "floating point mode" or an "integer mode". This is a common
source of bugs, since integer-mode objects will convert from float to int before processing,
discarding any values after the decimal point.

In this classic example, the result of the division 5 / 4 is computed as 1.25 , but displays as 1 in
an integer numbox. This is the expected behavior, but sometimes it can be subtle when an object is
in integer-mode.

129

User Guide / Data / Integers and Floats

The object containing a / , defining a division operation, can operate either in "integer mode" or
"floating-point mode" depending on whether the argument has a decimal or not. As you can see,
the integer-mode object will truncate any decimal component.

The scale object behaves similarly—so long as all of the arguments are integers, the object will be in
"integer mode", and the output will be truncated to an integer value. The scale object on the left
demonstrates this behavior. However, if any of the arguments to scale contains a decimal, then the
object will be in "floating point mode", and the output will be a float, even if the input is an integer.

Some objects, like pack, pak, and trigger, can be configured to cast their inputs to floats or integers.
A trigger object with the arguments f and i , as pictured, will cast its input to a float for the
leftmost outlet, and to an integer for the rightmost. As you can see, the floating point box on the
right displays the truncated value.

130

User Guide / Data / Integers and Floats

Lastly, it's worth mentioning the typeroute object, which can route messages by their type,
separating out integers from floats.

A handful of other objects, in particular objects to do with simple math operations, will exhibit
special behavior for integers and floats. When in doubt, check the help files and object reference
documentation for more information.

Technical Details
In Max, integers are whole numbers. All integers are 64-bit, so the smallest integer that can pass
between objects is -9,223,372,036,854,775,808, and the largest is 9,223,372,036,854,775,807.
Floating point numbers in Max are also 64-bit (double precision). Messages can contain positive or
negative numbers with a magnitude as large as 10308 10308, or as small as 10−308 10−308. Unlike
integers, floating point numbers are not evenly spaced. There are as many floating point numbers
between 0 and 1 as there are between 1 and 10308 10308. This may or may not be spiritually
significant.

Gen + RNBO
Unlike Max, Gen and RNBO do not use integers for any internal computation. If you really want
Max-style integer math, for example truncating the result of a division operation, then you're best
off using the trunc object for Gen, and the trunc object for RNBO.

131

User Guide / Data / Strings

Strings
When to Use Strings

132

Working with Strings

132

JavaScript

135

Strings vs Symbols

137

A String is a container for text (specifically UTF-8 text) that is independent of Max's Symbol Table.
You can create and manage Strings using the string object. Like Arrays and Dictionaries, Strings
have names and can be passed between objects with string u12345678 messages. For
developers, a String wraps Max's internal t_string object.

When to Use Strings
In addition to the string object, Max has several objects for editing, combining, filtering, and
searching through strings. The string.at object searches a string for the position of a substring, and
string.slice creates a new string from a character range within an existing string. If your patchers
require this sort of text manipulation, it's easier and more efficient to use these purpose-built String
objects than it is to use Symbols.

Working with Strings
Create a new String using the string object. The first argument is the initial value for the string, and
you can (optionally) provide a name for the string as well using the @name attribute. Strings with
the same name will share the same value, so you can create a string in one place and then refer to it
somewhere else. When you print a string using the print object, Max will format the output to show
the name and contents of the string.

132

User Guide / Data / Strings

Strings basics

If you use a message object to display a string, you'll see the actual values that pass between Max
objects when sending a string in a message. In a message, a string is represented by the symbol
string followed by the unique identifier for that string. If you don't give your string an explicit
name using the @name attribute, Max will assign one automatically.

The message object has a @convertobjs attribute which will automatically convert
received String objects into symbols for display.

If a string object changes the input string somehow, it will output a new string rather than
modifying the original. This means that if you want to modify a string recursively, adding your
changes back to the original string, you can use the name of the string to replace the original string.

133

User Guide / Data / Strings

pattr and pattrstorage
The pattr and pattrstorage objects will store the value of a string. They do not store the string itself,
so if you modify the string after storing its value in a pattr object, the updated value will not appear
in pattr until you send the string to pattr again.

In this example, changing the value of the string by sending the new_value message to the second
string object will not update the value stored in pattr.

Backwards compatibility
If a receiving object does not understand the new string type, then Max will automatically
convert that string into a symbol to maintain compatibility.

134

User Guide / Data / Strings

A handful of control objects will always pass strings unmodified, so that they can still be used to
route strings between objects. Those objects include:

append
prepend
route
routepass
trigger
match
router
universal
typeroute~
gate/switch

The trigger object passes the string message through without decomposing it into a symbol. This works even when
we use the symbol formatter for trigger.

JavaScript

135

User Guide / Data / Strings

Use the MaxString class to create a JavaScript reference to a Max String. You can give it an initial
value by passing a string value to the constructor. Update the value of the string by calling .parse
or .set .

var max_str = new MaxString("initial_value");
max_str.parse("new_value"); // update the string contents

By setting the name property of the MaxString , you can refer to a String defined in the parent
patcher.

var max_str = new MaxString();
max_str.name = "fred"; // Now the MaxString refers to a string named "fred"
max_str.set("new_value"); // Updates the string in the containing patcher

If you want to manipulate the String value, call .stringify or .get to turn the Max String into a
JavaScript string. From there, you can use regular JavaScript string manipulation functions.

var max_str = new MaxString();
max_str.set("the original string value");
var js_str = max_str.get(); // retrieve the value as a JS string
var updated_str = js_str.replace("original", "new");
max_str.parse(updated_str);
post(max_str.stringify()); // prints "the new string value"

To send a Max String out of an outlet defined in JavaScript, send the symbol "string" followed by
the name of the string.

136

User Guide / Data / Strings

function bang() {
var str = new MaxString();
str.parse("I got a bang");
outlet(0, "string", str.name);
}

Strings vs Symbols
When working in Max, most of the time, objects pass around text in the form of symbols. When you
include text like bgcolor or set in a list, you're using a symbol. Max doesn't pass the text of a
symbol directly, but instead generates a unique identifier for each symbol, passing that identifier
between objects instead. This makes certain operations on symbols very efficient, for example
comparing the value of two symbols. However, it also means that every time you use a new symbol,
it must be assigned to a unique identifier, and that identifier must be added to the Symbol Table.
The identifiers added to the Symbol Table are never removed -- the table will grow forever until
Max is quit, or runs out of memory.

Strings, on the other hand, do not interact with the Symbol Table. Instead, Max manages Strings in a
similar way to Buffers or the contents of a dict object. The text contents of a String are located
somewhere in memory, and Max gives that memory a name that can be used to locate the contents
of the String. The object interface to a block of audio samples is buffer~, and the object interface to
a Dictionary is the dict object. In a similar way, the string object is the interface to a text String.
When a buffer~ or a dict is cleared, the underlying memory is released back to the operating system
to be used for new storage. The same applies to Strings, which can be, depending on your
requirements, a more efficient way to store text data.

One further difference is that Max symbols are restricted to 32767 characters. Strings have no such
limitation, and support the storage of huge blocks of text data.

137

User Guide / Debugging

Debugging

138

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

Debugging and Probing
Debugging

139

Enabling/disabling Debug Mode
Stepping Through

140
140

Illustration Mode

142

Probing

143

Debugging
With Debugging, you can monitor any messages passing along a patchcord, or pause execution and
walk through processing in the patcher step by step. Debugging starts with Watchpoints, which you
can configure to monitor, print, or pause. To add a watchpoint, right-click on any patchcord and
select Add Watchpoint, or select a patchcord and select Add Watchpoint from the Debug menu.

Print Watchpoint: A Watchpoint that will print a message to the Max Console whenever a
message passes through the patch cord. This message indicates the source and destination
of the message, along with its contents.

A print watchpoint printing its message

Monitor Watchpoint: Display a popup in the Max patcher when a message passes through
the patchcord.
Break Watchpoint: Pause execution and open the Debug Window whenever a message
passes through the patchcord.

139

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

A break watchpoint pausing execution. You can see that the value 13 has not yet reached the live.dial,
which still displays the value 2.

Enabling/disabling Debug Mode
Choose Debugging from the Debug menu to enable debugging. You can also use the Debug icon in
the bottom toolbar to toggle debugging, as well as enabling Illustration Mode.

Stepping Through
When a Break Watchpoint is triggered, execution pauses and Max will focus on the Debug
Window. From here you can see the sender, receiver, and contents of the message that triggered
the watchpoint.

140

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

After triggering a breakpoint, The Continue button will let you resume execution, and the Abort
button will effectively remove the message from Max's scheduler and exit debugging. This can be
really useful, especially if the message is about to do something that you don't want.

The Continue and Abort buttons

The Step button is a very powerful tool in the Debug Window, allowing you to walk through the
flow of messages in a Max patcher one step at a time.

141

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

Pressing the step button moves through the patcher and adds layers to the call stack.

When stepping, whenever sending a message to an object triggers a new message, the new
message will appear at the bottom of the execution stack. In this way, you can see the whole
processing chain in response to a message.

If you are in the middle of debugging, you cannot operate your patcher. In addition, you
cannot close the patcher window being debugged, and you cannot quit Max. To exit
debugging and enable these functions again, choose Abort from the Debug menu, and
you will be able to operate Max normally.

Illustration Mode
Introduction
Activating illustration mode
Clearing pending messages

142

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

Probing
Probing lets you see the last message that passed through a patch cord by hovering over the patch
cord you want to inspect. With probing you can see messages, matrices and textures, as well as
audio vectors passing between objects. Event Probing, Signal Probing, and Matrix Probing must all be
enabled from the Debug menu before you can use them.

Probing in the Debug menu

Event Probing
With Event Probe enabled, hovering over any patchcord will display the last message that passed
through, or else no data if no message has passed through.

Signal Probe
The Signal Probe lets you see the audio data passing between two objects. With Signal Probe
enabled, hover over any audio patch cord to get a visualization of the data. While the signal probe
popup is visible, you can press the up or down arrow keys to cycle between Meter, Scope, and
History views.

143

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

The Signal Probe popup (all three views).

Signal Processing must be enabled in order to use the Signal Probe.

The Signal Probe also works with mc.* objects.

The Signal Probe with an mc object (all three views).

Matrix Probe
Unlike the Signal Probe and Event Probe, the Matrix Probe displays in a separate window. Enabling
Matrix Probe from the Debug menu will display the Matrix Probe window.

144

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

Viewing a matrix with the Matrix Probe.

From the Window tab, the Mode chooser will let you choose which plane of the matrix to inspect—
alpha, red, green, blue, or a composite of all four.

Choosing the plane to display

145

User Guide / Debugging / Debugging and Probing

The dropdown menus at the bottom of the window will let you view additional information about
the matrix, including the number of planes, the type of data contained in the matrix, and the
dimensions of the matrix.

Get more information about the matrix

The Scope tab shows useful statistics about the matrix. For example, the vectorscope view shows
the distribution of color intensities, which can help you visualize which colors are most common in
the matrix.

The *vectorscope* shows that red and orange are strong colors in the matrix.

146

User Guide / Debugging / Error Messages

Error Messages
Common Error Messages

147

When Max encounters an error, it will print a message to the Max Console. This message is often
specific to the object that generated it, and the message will usually contain whatever information
you need to figure out what went wrong. However, there are some common errors that you may
encounter often when working with Max

Common Error Messages
Files
<objectname>: error opening file

The object was able to locate the file with the name, but there was a problem reading or opening
the file.

<objectname> : <filename> : can't open

The object was not able to open the file. This could be because the file contained data that the
object was not able to understand, or because the file is missing, or because Max doesn't have
permission to read the file. It may be that the file is not in Max's Search Path, so make sure that
Max can locate the file.

<filename> : bad magic number

147

User Guide / Debugging / Error Messages

The Max file you tried to open is corrupted or is not a properly formatted Max document. Restore
the file from a backup copy if available.

<filename> : corrupt binary format file

The Max file you tried to open is corrupted or is not a properly formatted Max document. Restore
the file from a backup copy if available.

<filename> : error creating file

There was an error writing a file; the disk may be write-protected or full.

<filename> : out of memory writing file

There is insufficient memory to write the file you're trying to save. If possible, close other files and
windows that don't relate to the file you're saving.

Objects and Patching
<objectname> : bad argument creating object

The object was given an argument that it doesn't understand. This can happen when an object
expects a symbol as an argument, but gets a number instead.

<objectname> : bad arguments for message <message>

The object received a message that it understood, but with a bad argument. For example, trying to
set the name of a buffer~ object to be a number will display this error message, because the name
of a buffer~ cannot be a number.

148

User Guide / Debugging / Error Messages

<objectname> : doesn't understand <message-selector>

The object received a message, but it doesn't understand that message. This often occurs when
sending a symbol to a number box, when meaning to send an interger or float.

<objectname> : message too long <message>

A message was sent that contained more elements than the object can handle.

<objectname> : extra arguments for message <message-selector>

The object received a message that it understands, with valid arguments, but it received more
arguments than it expected. This will display as a warning, not an error, since the extra arguments
are simply ignored.

<objectname> : missing arguments for message <message>

149

User Guide / Debugging / Error Messages

The object received a message that it understands, but missing some arguments to that message.
When a buffer~ receives the set message, without any arguments, it will display this message,
because buffer~ expects an argument to the message set .

<objectname> : No such object

Max cannot find an object with the given name. Whether you're trying to load an Abstraction or an
External, make sure that the relevant file is in Max's Search Path. If you're opening a patch and you
see this error, the author may have forgotten to include an abstraction or external that the patch
depends on. It may also be that you need to install a Package from the Package Manager that
includes the missing dependencies.

can't connect <objectname> to <objectname>

Advisory message produced when you try to connect an outlet to an inlet that doesn't understand
the message sent by the outlet. Typically you'll only see this message when opening a saved
patcher, if for some reason an object doesn't load as expected.

No help available for <objectname>

A help file could not be located for the given object. Make sure that the help file (with the format
<objectname>.maxhelp ) is in the Search Path.

patcher connect: inlet <number> out of range

Occurs when editing the name or arguments of an object that has already been created in a patcher,
and patch cords that used to be connected to the object can no longer be connected. Very often
this occurs when changing the number of inlets or outlets of an object like gate or route, while that
object is created.

150

User Guide / Debugging / Error Messages

Audio
ad_mme: <message>

(Windows only) Please check that you have the latest driver update for your audio device. Please
exit all other audio applications, reboot if necessary, and try again. Also, please check your settings
in the Audio Status window to insure appropriate choices are selected for Input Device, Output
Device, Sampling Rate, IO Vector Size, and Signal Vector Size. If the problem persists, contact
Cycling '74 support.

ad_directsound: <message>

(Windows only) Please check that you have the latest driver update for your audio device. Please
exit all other audio applications, reboot if necessary, and try again. Also, please check your settings
in the Audio Status window to insure appropriate choices are selected for Input Device, Output
Device, Sampling Rate, IO Vector Size, and Signal Vector Size. If the problem persists, contact
Cycling '74 support.

ASIOCreateBuffers error

(Windows only) A problem was encountered initializing the ASIO device. Please check that you have
the latest driver update from your audio device manufacturer. Please also try different settings for
the device buffer sizes and latency in the control panel for your audio device provided by your
device manufacturer. Check that another audio application is not using the audio device. Also check
that the audio device is not the default audio device for Windows System Sounds.

midi_mme: <message>

(Windows only) Max was unable to open the MIDI input or output device. Please exit from all other
MIDI applications and try again.

MSP/ASIO: <message>

(Windows only) A problem was encountered initializing the ASIO device. Please check that you have
the latest driver update from your audio device manufacturer. Please also try different settings for
the device buffer sizes and latency in the control panel for your audio device provided by your
device manufacturer. Check that another audio application is not using the audio device. Also check
that the audio device is not the default audio device for Windows System Sounds

151

User Guide / Debugging / Illustration Mode

Illustration Mode
Enabling Illustration Mode

152

Illustration Mode and Debugging

153

Debug Event Queue

153

Observe your patcher running in slow motion to understand and/or debug its operation.

Enabling Illustration Mode
Choose Illustration Mode from the Debug menu. You can also click the Debug icon in the bottom
patcher toolbar to show the debug menu.

Illustration Mode is generally a global setting for all patcher windows.

A Simple Example
Whlie it might seem as if everything in Max happens all at once, there's a predictable order of
operations that becomes visible once you slow things down. The animation below demonstrates the
right-to-left sorting of patch cords from a single outlet.

152

User Guide / Debugging / Illustration Mode

Illustration Mode in Action

Illustration Mode and Debugging
Most Max debugging features work in Illustration Mode. Your patcher will run in slow motion and
messages wil "travel" down patch cords, unlike traditional Max debugging where the patcher runs at
regular speed until you stop execution at a Break watchpoint. If a Break watchpoint is encountered
in Illustration Mode, excecution will pause. You can then choose Continue from the Debug menu to
resume Illustration Mode execution, Abort to cancel execution entirely, or Step to advance to the
next outlet and pause again. Choosing Pause from the Debug menu will also pause execution.

When paused, unchecking Illustration Mode in the Debug menu will continue normal execution.

Debug Event Queue
When using either Illustration Mode or debugging, Max is not completely frozen and other events
could occur. Examples include changing UI objects or incoming MIDI messages. Events that occur
while debugging or in Illustration Mode are placed into event queues before they are sent out an
outlet and illustrated. When the current computation sequence completes, the next event will be
removed from the event queue and processed.

153

User Guide / Debugging / Illustration Mode

In the example below, events are queued when you move a slider, then output one by one once the
processing chain of objects connected to the button completes. The pending event queue for each
outlet is represented by an orange bubble showing the count of events remaining to process.

Debug Event Queue

To empty the event queue for an outlet, cancelling all pending events, click the close button on the
orange bubble. To cancel pending events at all outlets, click the Debug icon in the bottom toolbar
and choose Cancel Pending Events.

You can set the maximum size of the Illustration Mode Event Queue in the Preferences window.
(The size defaults to 0 which is unlimited.)

As an example, if you set the maximum queue size to 15, up to 15 events will be stored in the
queue at each outlet. Once the queue is full, new events will begin overwriting the oldest events.

154

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

Max Console
Showing the Max Console

155

Using the Max Console

157

Adjusting the Font and Size

161

Color Coding and Errors

161

The Max Console Contextual Menu
Console-related Objects

162
163

The Max Console displays printed text messages including status information, error messages, and
warnings. If your patcher isn't working the way you expect, one of the first things you should do is
check the Max Console to see if any error messages appear here. You can write to the Max console
directly using the print object, or in Debug Mode by using a Print Watchpoint on a patchcord (see
Debugging and Probing).

Showing the Max Console
Max console sidebar
Click on the Max Console button on the right-hand toolbar to open the Max Console in the sidebar.
To close the sidebar, click on the Close button, or click on the Max Console button.

155

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

The Max Console sidebar provides all of the functions of the Max Console window. Additionally,
you can limit the messages viewed in the Max Console sidebar by clicking on the Messages for This
Patcher Only icon at the top of the sidebar.

Dedicated window
Open the Window menu and choose Max Console . This will display the console in its own window.
The Max application keeps track of whether or not the Max Console is visible when you quit the
program, and will hide or show the window at its last size and position when you relaunch Max
based on its state when you last used Max.

156

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

Using the Max Console
Clearing the console
Clear the Max Console by clicking the Clear All button in the bottom toolbar.

You can also select the lines that you'd like to delete, and choose Delete or Cut from the Edit menu.

Viewing message time
The Show Message Time button will display the time since each message was generated.

Finding the object that generated a message

157

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

If a row of the Max Console displays the name of an object, hover over the row and a green tinge
will appear over the object. Double-click on the row to cause the object that generated the error to
be scrolled into view and brought to the front. You can also click the Show Object button in the
bottom toolbar.

You can also use the Max Console Contextual Menu to find the object that generated a
message.

Copying text
To copy text from the Max Console, select the lines you want to copy, then choose Copy from the
Edit menu.

Filtering the contents of the Max Console
Suppose the Max Console contains the following:

158

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

Enter any text into the filter field to display only messages that contains that text.

Click the "+" button to the right of the filter field to add search criteria. This will let you filter for
messages from a particular object, patcher, or class of objects. You can also command-click or rightclick on a console line to display the contextual menu, then select "Filter By This Object" to show
only messages generated by that single object.

159

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

You can use regular expressions in the search field as well by beginning and ending your search
query with a / character.

Finally, the Show Only Errors button button in the bottom toolbar will hide all messages except for
errors.

The REPL
The REPL (Read-Evaluate-Print-Loop) at the bottom of the Max Console lets you interact with the
current Max patcher using text.

160

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

Using the REPL, you can:

Send messages to Max objects in your patcher
Evaluate JavaScript expressions
Control the Max environment with text-based commands
Access the documentation
Check out the REPL documentation for more information.

Adjusting the Font and Size
To adjust the font and size, bring the dedicated Max console window to the front, then choose
Show Fonts from the Object. Your chosen font and size will be saved for the next time you launch
Max.

Color Coding and Errors
Rows of the Max Console are color coded.

gray/white: status information or messagess sent to a print object
yellow: warnings
red: error messages
blue: internal errors (bugs in Max itself)
You can find a listing of common error messages here.

161

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

On the patcher toolbar, the Max Console button will display a badge if there are any errors or
printed messages to be displayed. The badge can be cleared by setting focus to the Max Console
window.

The Max Console Contextual Menu
Command-click or right-click on a Max Console message to display the contextual menu. There are
several options for using the messages as well as managing the Max Console contents.

Show This Object will bring the object into view and apply a green tinge over the object.

162

User Guide / Debugging / Max Console

Select This Object will select the object that generated the message.
Filter By This Object will filter the contents of the Max Console to show only the current
object's messages. To remove the filter, click the Remove Criteria button at the top of the
window.
Copy All Output By This Object will copy the text of all of an object's messages to the
clipboard. This can be useful for capturing data or documenting error conditions.
Delete All Output By This Object will remove all messages generated by the object that
generated the selected message. Once deleted, the text cannot be retrieved.

Console-related Objects
The print and error Objects
Use the print object to log a message to the Max console. You can also use the error object in the
same way, except any messages sent to the error object will have special "error" formatting.

The console Object
The console object lets you receive messages that would print to the Max console directly in your
patcher. The console object can receive warnings, errors, or just general messages. You can also use
the textfilter message to set a filter for the console object specifically, the same as the text
filter in the console itself. See the console object helpfile or the console object reference for more
information.

163

User Guide / Files

Files

164

User Guide / Files / File Browser

File Browser
Browsing
Adding Files to the Search Path

165
166

Advanced Search
Bookmarks
Collections

167
168
169

The File Browser is a graphical interface to Max's Search Path, letting you view, search, and
organize all the files that Max can access. It's helpful not only for finding your own files, but also for
finding all of the content that comes with Max. You can also create Collections, which are like
virtual folders that group together patchers and other media.

You can open the file browser from a Max patcher window by clicking the button in the left toolbar.

You can also select the Show File Browser option from the File menu.

Browsing
From the navigation bar on the left of the File Browser window, you can view Recently Used items,
Recently Added items.

165

User Guide / Files / File Browser

You can also browse content by package, or browse all of the content that comes built-in with Max.

Adding Files to the Search Path
166

User Guide / Files / File Browser

At the bottom of the File Browser window, there's a button that you can use to add files to the
search path and, by extension, the file browser.

Clicking this button will bring up a system dialog box that you can use to browse for files or folders
to add to Max's search path. If you select a file, that file will be visible and searchable in the file
browser. To remove that file from the search path, right-click on the file and select Remove from
Search Path.

From the same dialog box you can also add a whole folder to Max's search path. Once you do, you
can select File Preferences from the Options menu to view the path that you added. By default this
will add that folder and all subfolders to the Max search path. You can remove the folder by
selecting the folder and clicking the Remove Path button at the bottom of the File Preferences
window.

Advanced Search

167

User Guide / Files / File Browser

When you open the File Browser for the first time, or when you click on the Question Mark button
in the top-right of the window, you'll see a description of the advanced search syntax for the file
browser. This lets you build search queries to narrow in on just the content you're looking for. For
example, the search

package:BLOCKS kind:audio

will search only for audio files in the package BLOCKS. When you click on buttons in the left
sidebar, you may notice that these change the contents of the search box. In fact, these buttons are
just shortcuts to using the advanced search terms. Clicking on the Recently Used button is exactly
the same as starting a search with recent:true . Clicking on a button in the left sidebar and then
adding additional search terms is a convenient way to build up a complex search term.

Bookmarks
If you want to save a search query for later, you can click on the Bookmark Search button in the topright of the File Browser window, next to the search bar. This button creates a new Saved Search or
Bookmark so you can easily find it again later. And once you've created a Saved Search, you can
find it using the Saved Search button in the left sidebar.

168

User Guide / Files / File Browser

Collections
Collections group together patchers, media, and saved searches. In addition to helping you stay
organized, anything that you add to a Collection will also be added to the Max search path. You can
also access a Collection from the sidebar in any Max patcher, making them convenient for accessing
files that you use frequently.

Creating a Collection
Create a new Collection by clicking the Create New Collection button in the bottom-left of the File
Browser window.

169

User Guide / Files / File Browser

It's also possible to right-click on any file in the File Browser and select Add to Collection or Create
Collection with selected file.

Removing a Collection
To remove a collection, first open the collection in the File Browser. Then, click the Garbage Can
icon in the top-right of the collection viewer.

170

User Guide / Files / File Types

File Types
Several Max objects such as folder, umenu, and opendialog can refer to specific File Types. These
can be either an explicit file extension beginning with a dot (.png, .wav, .mp3, etc.), or Macintosh
four-character code. Even though they're called Macintosh codes, Max will recognize these on any
platform.

Here's a list of those file types, together with a description and the standard extensions associated
with each type.

Code

Description

Extensions

8BPS

Photoshop file

.psd

AFxB

FXB file

.fxb

AFxP

FXP file

.fxp

AIFF

AIFF audio file

.aif

AIFF

AIFF audio file

.aiff

ampf

Ableton Live Max Device

.amp

amxd

Ableton Live Max Device

.amxd

aPcs

VST Plug-In

.dll

aPcs

VST plug-in

.vst

APPL

Application

.app

APPL

Application

.exe

AUin

Audio Unit Plug-in

.auinfo

AUpi

Audio Unit Plug-in

.component

BMP

BMP file

.bmp

CAF

CAF audio file

.caf

171

User Guide / Files / File Types

cafe

Java class file

.class

css

CSS file

.css

DATA

audio file

.data

DICT

Dictionary file

.json

dict

Dictionary Instance

.maxdict

FBX

Autodesk FBX Model File

.fbx

FLAC

FLAC audio file

.flac

fold

Folder/Directory

Folder

gDSP

dsp.gen File

.gendsp

GenX

GenExpr file

.genexpr

GIFf

GIF file

.gif

gJIT

jit.gen File

.genjit

iLaF

External object

.mxd

iLaF

External object

.mxe

iLaX

External object

.mxo

iLaX

Macintosh External Object

.mxo

jar

Java Archive file

.jar

Jb3d

BlitzBasic 3D Model File

.b3d

Jbvh

Biovision BVH Motion Capture File

.bvh

Jdae

Collada Model File

.dae

JiT!

Jitter data file

.jit

JiT!

Jitter data file

.jxf

jlua

Lua Source File

.lua

Jmtl

Jitter Material File

.jitmtl

172

User Guide / Files / File Types

Jobj

Wavefront Object Model File

.obj

Jogr

Ogre3D XML Model File

.mesh.xml

JPEG

JPEG file

.jpeg

JPEG

JPEG file

.jpg

Jply

Stanford Polygon Library Model File

.ply

JSON

JSON

.json

JSON

Defaults file

.maxdefaults

JSON

Defaults definitions

.maxdefines

JSON

Help Patcher

.maxhelp

JSON

Patcher

.maxpat

JSON

Preferences file

.maxpref

JSON

Preset file

.maxpresets

JSON

Prototype

.maxproto

JSON

Query file

.maxquery

JSON

Swatches file

.maxswatches

Jstl

Stereolithography Model File

.stl

M4a

AAC audio file

.m4a

M4V

Video file

.m4a

maxb

Help file

.help

maxb

Patcher

.mxb

maxb

Patcher

.pat

maxc

Max Collective

.clct

maxc

Max Collective

.mxc

Midi

MIDI file

.mid

173

User Guide / Files / File Types

Midi

MIDI file

.midi

Midi

MIDI file

.syx

mLsn

Max Lesson File

.maxlesson

mMap

Max Mapping File

.maxmap

MooV

Video

.mov

Mp3

MP3 audio file

.mp3

mPak

Packed Package

.maxpack

MPEG

Video

.mpeg

MPEG

Video

.mpg

mpg4

Video

.mp4

mPrj

Project

.maxproj

mQur

Max Collection File

.maxcoll

mSnp

Snippet file

.maxsnip

mx@c

Collective

.mxf

mx64

Windows x64 external object

.mxe64

mxPL

Max Palette File

.maxpalette

mZip

Packed Project

.maxzip

NxTS

NeXT/Sun audio file

.snd

PICS

PICS file

.pics

PICT

PICT file

.pct

PICT

PICT file

.pict

PNG

PNG file

.png

PNG

PNG file

.png

PNGf

PNG file

.png

174

User Guide / Files / File Types

pSto

Pattrstorage Preset File (JSON)

.json

pStx

Pattrstorage Preset File (XML)

.xml

svg

SVG file

.svg

SWFL

Flash file

.swf

TEXT

OpenGL Shading Language file

.glsl

TEXT

Help file

.help

TEXT

Web page

.htm

TEXT

Web page

.html

TEXT

Java source file

.java

TEXT

Javascript file

.js

TEXT

XML OpenGL Pass Description file

.jxp

TEXT

XML Shader Description file

.jxs

TEXT

XML Reference file

.maxref.xml

TEXT

XML Tutorial file

.maxtut.xml

TEXT

XML Vignette file

.maxvig.xml

TEXT

Patcher

.mxt

TEXT

Patcher

.pat

TEXT

Text file

.txt

TEXT

Web page

.xhtml

TEXT

XML file

.xml

TIFF

TIFF file

.tif

TIFF

TIFF file

.tiff

ULAW

SND file

.snd

VfW

AVI video

.avi

175

User Guide / Files / File Types

WAVE

WAVE audio file

.wav

WMV2

Video File

.asf

WMV3

Video File

.wmv

WMVA

Video File

.wmv

WVC1

Video File

.wmv

xdll

Windows external object

.mxe

xQZZ

Support file

.hibundle

XSLT

XSLT file

.xsl

YAML

YAML

.yaml

YAML

YAML

.yml

ZIP

Zip archive

.zip

176

User Guide / Files / Search Path

Search Path
Editing the Search Path
Max 9 Folder

177
179

Path Objects
Projects

180
182

Standalones

182

The Search Path is a collection of folders that Max looks through whenever it needs to find a file. It
lets you reference files based on just their name, rather than their absolute path. To locate a file,
Max looks in the following places, in order:

The folder containing the currently open patch
The project to which the current patcher belongs, if any
The Max 9 Folder, including built-in patches and media, installed Projects, and others
The folders in the current search path, in order
The File Browser lets you search, organize, and filter files in the current search path.

Editing the Search Path
Edit the search path by selecting File Preferences... from the Options Menu. This will open the File
Preferences window.

177

User Guide / Files / Search Path

The paths to the folders for User Library, Global Library, Examples, and Snapshots are managed by
Max and cannot be modified. If you want Max to search other folders when looking for files, you
can add your own folders using this window.

Select any path and click the Reveal in Finder buttom in the bottom toolbar to open that
folder in Finder or File Explorer.

Adding a file to the search path
Click on the Add Path button in the bottom-left of the window. This will add a new, empty row to
the search path list. Click the Choose button to open a dialog box that lets you browse for the folder
you'd like to add to the search path. You can also name your path by double-clicking on the Name
field. If you'd like to include subfolders as well, check the Subfolders box.

178

User Guide / Files / Search Path

Removing a file from the search path
Select any path and click the Remove Path button in the bottom toolbar to remove it from the
search path.

Listing all folders in the search path
You can click the List Path button in the bottom toolbar to list all of the folders currently in the
search path. This includes subfolders and can include a lot of folders.

Max 9 Folder
Max adds a folder to the Documents directory called Max 9 , containing files of different kinds that
get added to Max as you work with it. This folder is located at
%HOMEDRIVE%%HOMEPATH%\Documents\Max 9\Library on Windows and ~/Documents/Max 9/ on

other operating systems.

179

User Guide / Files / Search Path

The Library and Snapshots folders are automatically added to the search path. Folders in
the Paackages folder are also added, as each package is loaded.

Collections - Collections that you make using the File Browser get stored here
Library - This folder is for your use. Whatever files you put in this folder will be included in
Max's search path.
Packages - Packages instlaled by the Package Manager get installed here.
Palettes - Palettes that you create using the Color Picker get stored here.
Projects - This is the default location to save projects. Max will also unpack amxds here.
Prototypes - Any saved Prototypes will be stored here.
Recordings - The default directory for audio Recordings.
Snapshots - New Snapshots get saved here.
Snippets - When you create a Snippet, it gets stored here.
Styles - New Styles get saved here.
Templates - Saved Templates go to this directory.

Path Objects
Several objects facilitate working with Max's search path:

Name

Description

absolutepath

Convert a file name to an absolute path

conformpath

Convert file path styles

filepath

Manage and report on the Max search path

relativepath

Convert an absolute to a relative path

strippath

Separate filename from a full pathname

180

User Guide / Files / Search Path

Path Prefixes
When resolving a file path, Max can use special path prefixes to locate files relative to a known
location. For example, you could use the path Patcher:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat to locate a
patcher relative to the current patcher, even if the patcher my_patcher.maxpat is not in the
current search path. This works for all objects that can load files. The absolutepath and conformpath
objects can be used to illustrate where Max is resolving these relative paths on disk.

Prefix

Description

Example

~:

path relative to the user's home folder

~:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

C74:

path relative to the Cycling '74

C74:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

resources folder (on macOS, this is
inside the application bundle
Max.app/Contents/Resources/C74/

, on Windows, this is the resources
folder next to the Max.exe
executable)
C74_AU

Max-specific plugin directory for
AudioUnit plugins. Mostly used with

`C74_AU:/MyPluginName

the plug message to vst~ to
disambiguate plugin types.
C74_VST

Max-specific plugin directory for VST
plugins. Mostly used with the plug

`C74_VST:/MyPluginName

message to vst~ to disambiguate
plugin types.
C74_VST3

Max-specific plugin directory for VST3

`C74_VST3:/MyPluginName

plugins. Mostly used with the plug
message to vst~ to disambiguate
plugin types.
Usermax:

path relative to the Max 9 folder in

Usermax:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

the user's Documents folder
Desktop:

path relative to the user's Desktop
folder

Desktop:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

181

User Guide / Files / Search Path

Tempfolder:

path relative to Max's temp
folder (this folder will be

Tempfolder:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

automatically emptied when
Max quits)
Package:

path relative to the package

Package:/miraweb/misc/app.js

specified in package-name
Project:

path relative to the project (if
any) containing the file loading

Project:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

object
Patcher:

path relative to the patcher (if

Patcher:/sources/my_patcher.maxpat

any) containing the file loading
object

Projects
Projects collect and organize dependencies. All files in a given project will be able to locate other
files in the same project. In addition, projects support Project Search Paths, which are extra search
path folders specified by that project. For more details, see the documentation for Projects.

Max for Live devices are just projects, and follow the same rules as projects when
locating files using the search path.

Standalones
Search paths in standalones work more or less the same as in regular Max, with a couple of small
differences. Check out the documentation for Standalones for more details.

182

User Guide / Gen

Gen

183

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Gen
Why Use Gen?
Working with Gen
Creating a Gen Patch

185
186
186

Patching in Gen
Auto-compile

187
188

Gen Operators
Standard Operators

188
190

Argument Expressions
Send and Receive
Subpatchers and Abstractions

191
191
192

Subpatcher/Abstractions and Parameters
Setting Parameter Defaults

194
197

The gen~ Object
gen~ Operators

198
199

History
Delay
Data and Buffer

200
200
201

Event-rate Gen
Technical notes

203
204

Jitter Gen Objects
Jitter Operators
jit.gen

204
204
208

jit.pix
jit.gl.pix

209
210

Technical notes (Jitter Gen)
See Also

210
212

Gen is a visual, graph-based programming language. It's syntax is extremely similar to Max, so
similar that we program Gen patchers using the Max environment. However, Gen uses a different
set of objects from Max—within a gen~ subpatcher, you can only use Gen objects.

The main difference between Max and Gen is that while Max works by sending messages between
instantiated objects, a Gen patcher is more like a description of how a patcher should be. In order to

184

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

process audio or computer graphics, a Gen patcher is first used to generate code, which is then
compiled and run in the Max environment.

Why Use Gen?
You want to do low-level, visual programming, while still getting the performance of
compiled C or GLSL code.
It's easier to describe your process using text code, but you want to use codebox, rather
than compiling a C object.
You need single-sample delay for signal processing techniques like filtering, synthesis, and
physical modeling.
You want to design a graphics shader, but you don't want to write GLSL code.
You want to export your C or GLSL code, for use in an environment other than Max.
Examples
arbitrary new oscillator and filter designs using single-sample feedback loops with gen~
reverbs and physical models using networks of short feedback delays with gen~
sample-accurate buffer~ processing such as waveset distortions with gen~
efficient frequency-domain processing such as spectral delays using gen~ inside pfft~
custom video processing filters as fast as C compiled externals with jit.pix, and graphics card
accelerated with jit.gl.pix
geometry manipulation and generation with jit.gen
particle system design with jit.gen
iso-surface generation with distance fields in jit.gen
Performance Improvements
A chain of Gen objects compiles down into one single meta-object, removing the usual
overhead that Max encounters when passing messages and signals between objects.
replacement for jit.expr with performance and interface improvements

185

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

You want to be able to have a simple way to make use of the GPU for image processing both
in visual and textual form

Working with Gen
Gen patchers are specialized for specific domains such as audio (MSP) and matrix and texture
processing (Jitter). The Max Gen object is called gen. The MSP Gen object is called gen~. The Jitter
Gen objects are jit.gen, jit.pix and jit.gl.pix. Each of these Gen objects contains within it a Gen
patcher. While gen patchers share many of the same capabilities, each Gen object has functionality
specific to its domain. For example, Gen patchers in gen~ have delay lines while Gen patchers in
jit.gen have vector types.

A listing of operators common to all Gen objects
A listing of operators common to all gen~ objects
A listing of operators common to all Gen Jitter objects

Creating a Gen Patch
Create a gen or gen~ object for message and signal processing, and create a jit.gen, jit.pix, or
jit.gl.pix for image processing.

gen — create a processing object that runs at message rate, using gen common and gen dsp
operators.
gen~ — create a signal object that runs at signal rate, in Max's DSP chain, using gen common
and gen dsp operators.
jit.gen — create a matrix processing object that runs on the CPU. Uses gen common and gen
jitter operators.
jit.pix — create a matrix processing object that runs on the CPU, but that's optimized to
work on frames of video as opposed to more general matrix types. Always locked to 4
planes, but somewhat more efficient than jit.gen. Uses gen common and gen jitter
operators.
jit.gl.pix — create a texture processing object that runs on the GPU. Always locked to 4
planes, but much faster and more efficient than jit.gen or jit.pix. Compiles to GLSL code,
which can be exported and run in other graphics processing environments. Uses gen
common and gen jitter operators.

186

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Whichever object you make, you'll get a Gen object that contains a Gen subpatcher. Just like a
patcher object, you can double-click on the Gen object to see its contents. When you do, you'll see
the default Gen patcher, which simply adds together its inputs.

A gen~ object, and its contents

Gen patchers can be embedded within the gen, gen~, jit.gen, etc. object, or can be loaded from
external files (with .gendsp or .genjit file extensions respectively) using the @gen attribute of
gen, gen~, jit.gen, etc. objects.

Patching in Gen
Patching in Gen should feel very similar to patching in Max. The basic Max paradigms—making
objects, connection them—are all the same.

The Gen patcher window has some small differences from the standard Max window, in order to
facilitate patching in Gen.

Conceptual differences between Max and Gen

187

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

In Max, objects send messages to each other. In Gen, there are no messages. All operations
are synchronous, much like signal flow in Max. Because of this, there are no UI objects
(sliders, buttons etc.). However the param operator can be used to receive message-rate
controls from the normal Max world. There is no need to differentiate hot and cold inlets, or
the order in which outlets "fire", since all objects and outlets always fire at the same time.
There are no send and receive operators in Gen patcher. Gen patchers are connected to
the outside world through the in, out, and param operators. In gen~, there are some
additional operators such as history, data and buffer that are controllable with messages to
gen~.
The usual distinction between int and float numbers does not apply to Gen patchers. At the
Gen patcher level, everything is a 64-bit floating point number.
The codebox is a special operator for Gen patchers, in which more complex expressions
can be written using the GenExpr language.

Auto-compile
Remember that Gen patchers must be compiled before they can run. By default, the compilation
process occurs in the background while you are editing, so that you can see or hear the results
immediately. This auto-compilation process can be disabled using the Auto-Compile toggle in the
Gen patcher toolbar. With auto-compilation disabled, click the Compile icon to compile manually.

See the Gen patcher differences section of the Patcher Window guide for more.

Gen Operators
The fundamental processing object in Max is the Object, and the fundamental processing unit in
Gen is the Gen Operator. You can call an operator by creating an object box in Gen, or by calling the
operator as a function in GenExpr code.

188

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Patching into a change operator is the same as calling the change function in GenExpr

Gen operators take arguments and attributes just like Max objects, but these are purely declarative.
Since there is no messaging in Gen patchers, the attribute value set when the operator is created
does not change. Attributes are most often used to specialize the implementation of the process
the operator represents (such as setting a maximum value for param using the @max attribute.)

In many cases, the specification of an object’s argument effectively replaces the corresponding
inlet. This is possible in Gen because there is no messaging and all processing is synchronous. For
example, the + operator takes two inputs, but if an argument is given only one input needs to be
specified as an inlet.

If the + operator has an argument, it no longer needs a second inlet

189

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

An inlet with no connected patchcord uses a default value instead (often zero, but check the inlet
assist strings for each operator). An inlet with multiple connections adds them all together, just like
with signal patchcords.

In gen and gen~, two patch cables connected to the same operator inlet will add together.

Standard Operators
Many standard objects behave like the corresponding Max or MSP object, such as all arithmetic
operators (including the reverse operators like !- , !/ etc.), trigonometric operators ( sin , cosh ,
atan2 etc.), standard math operators ( abs , floor , pow , log , etc.), boolean operators ( > , == ,
&& (also known as and ) etc.) and other operators such as min , max , clip (also known as
clamp ), scale , fold , wrap , cartopol , poltocar etc. In addition there are some operators in

common with GLSL ( fract , mix , smoothstep , degrees , radians etc.) and some drawn from
the jit.op operator list ( >p , ==p , absdiff etc.). There are several predefined constants available (
pi , twopi , halfpi , invpi , degtorad , radtodeg , e , ln2 , ln10 , log10e , log2e , sqrt2 ,
sqrt1_2 and the same in capitalized form as PI , TWOPI etc), which can be used in place of a

numeric argument to any operator.

190

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Multiply by the constant pi using twopi or TWOPI.

Argument Expressions
For all objects that accept numeric arguments (e.g. [+ 2.] or [max 1.] ) argument expressions
can be used in their place. Argument expressions are simple statements with known inputs such as
constants, Gen patcher inputs, and parameter names. Many gen operators can be used as argument
expressions, particularly the math operators (sqrt, cos, etc.). Argument expressions can help simplify
Gen patchers where all that is needed is the calculation of a constant that isn't pre-defined, such as
3 ∗ 𝑝𝑖/23 ∗ pi/2. For example, in the patch below, there is a scale operator with an argument of
sqrt(2)*2 .

Similarly, the mul (*) operator has an argument expression of 1+in2 . Since in2 is the GenExpr
equivalent of [in 2] , it can be used in an argument expression.

Send and Receive

191

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

send and receive within gen patchers can be used to connect objects without patchcords. In gen
patchers, send and receive can only be used locally. They will not connect to send and receive
objects in other gen patchers or gen subpatchers.

send and receive take a name argument that determines connectivity.

Using send and receive in a Gen patcher

There can be multiple send and receive objects with the same name without issue. If there are
multiple send objects with the same name, they will be summed just as if multiple patchcords were
connected to the same inlet. If there are multiple receive objects with the same name, they will all
receive identical input from their corresponding send objects.

Subpatchers and Abstractions
Subpatchers and abstraction in Gen objects behave practically identically to standard Max
subpatchers and abstractions. In Gen objects, subpatchers are created with the gen operator. If the

192

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

gen operator is given the name of a Gen patcher as an argument, it will use it to set the titlebar of
the subpatcher.

Using the gen operator to make subpatchers in Gen

Abstractions, as with standard max abstractions, are created by saving a Gen patcher, then
instantiated by creating an object with the name of the saved Gen file to load as the abstraction.
For example, if an operator named differential is created, gen will look for the file
differential.gendsp with gen~ and differential.genjit with the Jitter Gen objects.

Instantiating abstractions this way is shorthand for setting the @file attribute on the gen
operator. For example, creating an operator differential is equivalent to
gen @file differential . Abstractions of gen~ and gen patchers save with the .gendsp file

extension and abstractions of jit.gen, jit.pix and jit.gl.pix save with the .genjit file extension.

193

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Save a Gen abstraction by choosing Save As... from the File menu when focused on a
Gen subpatcher.

Subpatcher/Abstractions and Parameters
Just like normal gen patchers, Gen subpatchers and abstractions can also contain parameters.
When used in subpatchers and abstractions, parameters behave like named inlets with default
values. If nothing is connected to a parameter in a subpatcher or abstraction, the parameter will be
a constant and its value will be its default.

194

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

In the above example, the subpatcher has a parameter @scale with a default of 1. In the
subpatcher's sidebar, we see this represented in the GenExpr code as

Param scale(1.);

However, in the parent Gen patcher, the parameter gets converted into a constant because nothing
is connected to the parameter.

195

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

The first line in the parent patcher's GenExpr sidebar reads:

scale_1 = 0.;

This sets the @scale parameter to a constant value.

Since subpatcher and abstraction parameters don't create their own inlets to connect objects to,
there is a special operator called setparam that can be connected to any inlet for this specific
purposes. setparam connects all of its inputs to a named parameter in a subpatcher or abstraction.
It requires an argument specifying the name of the parameter to connect to.

When setparam is connected to a parameter, the parameter changes from being a constant to a
dynamic variable equivalent to the value at the input of the setparam object.

196

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Notice that the code in the parent subpatcher has changed from a constant to:

setparam_1 = in2;

in is conected to the inlet of the setparam object so the scale parameter takes on that value.

Setting Parameter Defaults
The default value for param objects within Gen patchers and subpatchers can be set either directly
in the param object in the form param paramnamevalue(s) or in the containing gen~ object box in
the form gen~ @paramname value(s) . If a default is declared in both the param object and in the
containing gen object box, the object box will override the value declared in the param object.

197

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

The parameter value @foo 21 in the top level overrides the default value of 74.

This also applies to Gen subpatchers and abstractions; however, object box declared values only go
one patcher deep. So gen~ @foo 10 would set the default for any param object named foo in the
top-level gen~ patcher, but not param objects named foo contained in Gen subpatchers and
abstractions.

The gen~ Object

198

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

The gen~ object is specifically for operating on MSP audio signals. Unlike MSP patching however,
operations in a Gen patcher are combined into a single chunk of machine code, making possible
many more optimizations that can make complex processes more efficient, and allow you to design
processes which must operate on a per-sample level, even with feedback loops.

Working in gen~ opens up scope to design signal processes at a lower level, even per-sample.
Because of this, many operators take duration arguments in terms of samples (where the equivalent
MSP objects would use milliseconds).

gen~ Operators
In addition to the standard Gen operators , which are often similar to the equivalent MSP objects
(such as clip , scale , minimum , maximum , etc.), many of the operators specific to the gen~
domain mirror existing MSP objects to make the transition to gen~ easier. There are familiar
converters ( dbtoa , atodb , mtof , ftom , mstosamps , sampstoms ), oscillators ( phasor , train ,
cycle , noise ), and modifiers ( delta , change , sah , triangle ). In addition there are some

lower-level operators to avoid invalid or inaudible outputs ( isnan , fixnan , isdenorm ,
fixdenorm , dcblock ).

A global value of samplerate is available both as an object, and as a valid value for an argument of
any object.

The samplerate value is available as an object and as a constant in codebox

199

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

History
In general, the Gen patcher will not allow a feedback loop (since it represents a synchronous
process). To create a feedback loop in gen~, the history operator can be used. This represents a
single-sample delay (a 𝑍 − 1Z − 1 operation). Thus the inlet to the history operator will set the
outlet value for the next sample (put another way, the outlet value of the history operator is the
inlet value from the previous sample). Multiple history operators can be chained to create 𝑍 − 2
Z − 2, 𝑍 − 3Z − 3 delays, but for longer and more flexible delay operators, use the delay operator.

You can use the History operator as an object or in codebox.

A history operator in a Gen patcher can also be named, making it available for external
control, just like a param parameter.

Delay

200

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

The delay operator delays a signal by a certain amount of time, specified in samples. The maximum
delay time is specified as an argument to the delay object. You can also have a multi-tap delay by
specifying the number of taps in the second argument. Each tap will have an inlet to set the delay
time, and a corresponding outlet for the delayed signal.

The delay operator can be used for feedback loops, like the history operator, if the @feedback
attribute is set to 1 (the default). The @interp attribute specifies which kind of interpolation is
used:

none or step : No interpolation.
linear : Linear interpolation.
cosine : Cosine interpolation.
cubic : Cubic interpolation.
spline : Catmull-Rom spline interpolation.

Data and Buffer
For more complex persistent storage of audio (or any numeric) data, gen~ offers two objects: data
and buffer, which are in some ways similar to MSP’s buffer~ object. A data or buffer object has a
local name, which is used by various operators in the Gen patcher to read and write the data or
buffer contents, or get its properties.

Reading the contents of a data or buffer can be done using the peek, lookup, wave, sample or
nearest operators. The first argument for all of these operators is the local name of a data or buffer.
They all support single- or multi-channel reading (the second argument specifies the number of
channels, and the last inlet the channel offset, where zero is the default).

201

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

All of these operators are essentially the same, differing only in defaults of their attributes. The
attributes are:

index specifies the meaning of the first inlet:
samples : The first inlet is a sample index into the data or buffer.
phase : Maps the range 0..1 to the whole data or buffer contents.
lookup or signal : Maps the range -1..1 to the whole data or buffer contents, like the MSP
lookup~ object.
wave : Adds extra inlets for start/end (in samples), driven by a phase signal between these
boundaries (0..1, similar to MSP’s wave~ object). @boundmode specifies what to do if the
index is out of range:
ignore : Indices out of bounds are ignored (return zero).
wrap : Indices out of bounds repeat at the opposite boundary.
fold or mirror : Indices wrap with palindrome behavior.
clip or clamp : Indices out of bounds use the value at the bound. @channelmode specifies
what to do if the channel is out of range. It has the same options as the @boundmode
attribute.
interp specifies what kind of interpolation is used:

none or step : No interpolation.
linear : Linear interpolation.
cosine : Cosine interpolation.
cubic : Cubic interpolation.
spline : Catmull-Rom spline interpolation.
Operator

Defaults

nearest

@index phase @interp none @boundmode ignore @channelmode ignore

sample

@index phase @interp linear @boundmode ignore @channelmode ignore

peek

@index samples @interp none @boundmode ignore @channelmode ignore

202

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

lookup

`@index lookup @interp linear @boundmode clamp @channelmode clamp

wave

@index wave @interp linear @boundmode wrap @channelmode clamp

Accessing the spatial properties of a data or buffer objects is done using the dim and channels
operators (or the outlets of the data or buffer object itself), and writing is done using poke (noninterpolating replace) or splat (interpolating overdub).

Briefly, data should be thought of as a 64-bit buffer internal to the gen~ patcher, even though it can
be copied to, and buffer should be thought of as an object which can read and write external
buffer~ data. The full differences between data and buffer are:

A data object is local to the Gen patcher, and cannot be read outside of it. On the other
hand, a buffer object is a shared reference to an external MSP buffer~ object. Modifying the
contents in a Gen buffer is directly modifying the contents of the MSP buffer~ object it
references.
The data object takes three arguments to set its local name, its length (in samples) and
number of channels. The buffer object takes an argument to set its local name, and an
optional argument to specify the name of an MSP buffer~ object to reference (instead of
using the local name).
Setting the gen~ attribute corresponding to a named data object copies in values from the
corresponding MSP buffer~, while for a named buffer object it changes the MSP buffer~
referenced. The buffer object always has the size of the buffer~ object it references (which
may change). The data object has the size of its initial definition, or the size of the buffer~
object which was copied to it (whichever is smaller).
The data object always uses 64-bit doubles, while the buffer object converts from the bit
resolution of the MSP buffer~ object (currently 32-bit floats) for all read and write
operations, and may be less efficient.

Event-rate Gen
The gen~ object also has an event-rate version, called gen. Internally, the event-rate gen object
supports all of the same operators as gen~. The only difference is that gen is an event-rate object,
and is not part of the audio graph. Like most event-rate objects, the first inlet to gen is hot, and will
trigger computation. However, you can also use the @interval attribute in conjunction with the

203

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

@active attribute to enable an internal metronome, which will trigger computation at a consistent
1000
rate. When using the event-rate gen object, the samplerate operator will return @𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙

@interval1000​, and the vectorsize operator will always return 1.

Technical notes
All operations in gen~ use 64-bit doubles.

The compilation process for gen~ Gen patchers and GenExprs includes an optimization that takes
into account the update rate of each operator, so that any calculations that do not need to occur at
sample rate (such as arithmetic on the outputs of param operators) instead process at a slower rate
(determined by the host patcher vector size) for efficiency.

Jitter Gen Objects
There are three Gen objects in Jitter: jit.gen, jit.pix, and jit.gl.pix. The jit.gen and jit.pix objects
process Jitter matrices similar to jit.expr. The jit.gl.pix object processes textures and matrices just
like jit.gl.slab. The jit.gen object is a generic matrix processing object that can handle matrices with
any planecount, type and dimension. jit.pix and jit.gl.pix, on the other hand, are specifically designed
for working with pixel data. They can handle data of any type, but it must be two dimensional or
less and have at most four planes.

Jitter Operators
Coordinates
Jitter Gen patchers describe the processing kernel for each cell in a matrix or texture. As the kernel
is processing the input matrices, a set of coordinates is generated describing the location of the
current cell being processed. The objects are just like the operators in jit.expr. They are norm,
snorm, and cell, with the dim operator giving the dimensions of the input matrix.

norm ranges from [0, 1] across all matrix dimensions and is defined as norm = cell/dim.
snorm ranges from [-1, 1] across all matrix dimensions and is defined as snorm =
cell/dim*2-1.

204

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

cell gives the current cell index.
Vectors
Since Jitter matrices represent arrays of vector (more than one plane) data, all Gen operators in
Jitter can process vectors of any size, so Gen patchers once created work equally on any vector size.
The basic binary operators + , - , * , / , and % can take vector arguments as in
[+ 0.5 0.25 0.15] , which will create an addition operator adding a vector with the three

components to its input. Also, the param operator can take vector default values as in
[param 1 2 3 4] . Parameters can have up to 32 values in jit.gen and 4 values in jit.pix and

jit.gl.pix.

The vec operator creates vector constants and packs values together in a vector. It takes default
arguments for its components and casts all of its inputs to scalar values before packing them
together.

You can use the vec operator as an object or in a codebox

The swiz operator applies a swizzle operation to vectors. In GLSL and similar shading languages,
vector components can be accessed by indexing the vector with named planes. For example in GLSL
you might see

red = color.r

205

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

or

redalpha = color.ra

or even

val = color.rbbg

Use the swiz operator as an object to pick certain planes. In a codebox, do swizzling with a dot operator.

This type of operation is referred to as swizzling. The swiz operator can take named arguments using
the letters r , g , b , a , as well as x , y , z , w in addition to numeric indices starting at 0 . The
letters are convenient for vectors with four or less planes, but for larger vectors numeric indices
must be used. The compilation process automatically checks any swiz operation so arguments
indexing components larger than the vector being processed will be clamped to the size of the
vector.

206

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Out of bounds swiz operations will be clamped

In addition, there are the basic vector operations for spatial calculations. These are length,
normalize, cross, dot, and reflect.

Sampling
Sampling operators are one of the most powerful features of Jitter Gen patchers. Sampling
operators take an input and a coordinate in the range [0, 1] as an argument, returning the data
at the coordinate’s position in the matrix or texture. The first argument always has to be a Gen
patcher input while the second argument is an N-dimensional vector whose size is equal to the
dimensionality of the input it is processing. If the coordinate argument is outside of the range
[0, 1] , it will be converted to a value within the range [0, 1] according to its boundmode

function. Possible boundmodes are wrap , mirror , and clamp , where wrap is the default.

207

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

You can use the sample operator as an object or in codebox.

The two sampling operators in Jitter Gen patchers are sample and nearest. The sample operator
samples values form a matrix using N-dimensional linear interpolation. The nearest operator will
simply grab the value from the closest cell.

Geometry
Jitter Gen patchers include a suite of objects for generating surfaces. These include most of the
shapes available in the jit.gl.gridshape object. Each surface function returns two values: the vertex
position and the vertex normal. The geometry operators are sphere, torus, circle, plane, cone, and
cylinder.

Color
There are two color operators in Jitter Gen patchers. They are rgb2hsl and hsl2rgb. These convert
between the Red Green Blue color space and the Hue Saturation Luminance color space. If the
input to these objects has an alpha component, the alpha will be passed through untouched.

jit.gen
The jit.gen object is a general purpose matrix processing object. It compiles Gen patchers into
native machine code representing the kernel of an N-dimensional matrix processing routine. It
follows the Jitter matrix planemapping conventions for pixel data with planes [0-4] as the ARGB
channels.

208

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

jit.gen can have any number of inlets and outlets, but the matrix format for the different inputs and
outputs is always linked. In other words, the matrix format (planecount, type, dimensions) of the
first inlet determines the matrix format for all other inputs and outputs. jit.gen makes use of parallel
processing just like other parallel aware objects in Jitter for maximum performance with large
matrices.

How a matrix is processed by jit.gen is dependent on the input planecount, type, and dimension of
the input matrices. In addition, there is a @precision attribute that sets the type of the processing
kernel. The default value for precision is auto . Auto precision automatically adapts the type of the
kernel dependent upon the matrix input type. In auto mode, the following mapping between input
matrix type and kernel processing type is used:

char maps to fixed
long maps to float64
float32 maps to float32
float64 maps to float64
Other possible values for the precision attribute are fixed , float32 , and float64 . Fixed
precision is the only setting that doesn’t correspond to a Jitter matrix type. Fixed precision specifies
a kernel type that performs a type of floating point calculation with integers using a technique
called fixed-point arithmetic. It’s very fast and provides more precision than 8-bit char operations
without incurring the cost of converting to a true floating-point type. However, fixed-point
arithmetic calculations have more error that can sometimes be visible when using the sampling
operators. If there are noticeable artifacts, simply increase the internal precision to float32 .

jit.pix
The jit.pix object is a matrix processing object specifically for pixel data. When processing matrices
representing video and images, jit.pix is the best object. Internally, data is in RGBA format always. If
the input has less than four planes, jit.pix will convert it to RGBA format according to the following
rules:

1-plane, Luminance format, L to LLL1 (Luminance for RGB and 1 for Alpha)
2-plane Lumalpha format, LA to LLLA (Luminance for RGB and Alpha for Alpha)

209

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

3-plane RGB format, RGB to RGB1 (RGB for RGB and 1 for Alpha)
4-plane, ARGB format, ARGB to RGBA (changes the order of the channels internally)
The output of jit.pix is always a 4-plane matrix in ARGB format, which is the standard Jitter pixel
planemapping. Like jit.gen, jit.pix compiles Gen patchers into C++ and makes use of Jitter’s parallel
processing system. jit.pix also has a precision attribute that operates exactly the same was as it
does in jit.gen.

jit.gl.pix
The jit.gl.pix object is a matrix and texture processing object specifically for pixel data that operates
just like jit.gl.slab. The only difference between the two is that jit.gl.pix compiles its patcher into
GLSL while jit.gl.slab reads it from a shader file. Like jit.pix, jit.gl.pix uses an internal RGBA pixel
format.

Technical notes (Jitter Gen)
Numerical Values in the Kernel
All numerical values in Jitter Gen patches are conceptually floating point values. This is the case
even for fixed precision kernels. It is particularly important to remember this when dealing with char
matrices. All char matrices are converted to the range [0, 1] internally. On output, this range is
mapped back out to [0, 255] in the char type. A char value of 1 is equivalent to the floating point
value of 1/2551/255.

When using the comparison operators ( == , != , < , <= , > , >= ), it's particularly important to keep
in mind the floating point nature of Gen patcher internal values because of their inherent
imprecision. Instead of directly testing for equality for example , it's more effective to test for
whther a value falls within a certain small range (epsilon). In the example below, the absdiff
operator calculates how far a value is from 1/255 and then the < op tests to see if it's within the
threshold of error.

210

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

Rather than testing for equivalence, test whether values are within some epsilon distance of a target value.

jit.pix vs. jit.gl.pix
For the most part jit.pix and jit.gl.pix will behave identically despite one being CPU-oriented and the
other GPU-oriented. The differences have to do with differences in behavior between how matrix
inputs are handled with jit.pix and how texture inputs are handled with jit.gl.pix.

All of the inputs to jit.pix will adapt in size, type, and dimension to the left-most input. As a result,
all input matrices within a jit.pix processing kernel will have the same values for the cell and dim
operators. In jit.gl.pix, inputs can have different sizes. In jit.gl.pix, the values for the cell and dim
operators are calculated from the properties of the left-most input (in1). A future version may
include per-input cell and dim operators, but for now this is not the case.

Since the sampling operators take normalized coordinates in the range [0, 1] , differently sized
input textures will still be properly sampled using the norm operator since its value is independent
of varying input sizes. However, in jit.gl.pix the sample and nearest operators behave differently
than with jit.pix. How a texture is sampled is determined by the properties of the texture. As a
consequence, sample and nearest behave the same in jit.gl.pix. To enable nearest sampling, set the
@filter attribute to nearest. For linear interpolation, set @filter to linear (the default).

211

User Guide / Gen / Gen Overview

See Also
mc_gen

212

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

Gen Common Operators
Comparison
Constant
Declare

213
214
215

Expression
Ignore

215
215

Input-output
Logic

215
215

Math
Numeric
Powers

215
216
216

Range
Route

217
217

Subpatcher
Trigonometry

218
218

Waveform

219

The following Gen operators are common to all of Max's Gen family of objects. They can be used as
operators in the gen, gen~, jit.gen, jit.pix, and jit.gl.pix objects.

Comparison
!=p, neqp : Returns in1 if it does not equal in2, else returns zero. Equivalent to in1 * (in1 !=
in2)
>, gt : Returns 1 if in1 is greater than in2, else returns zero.
==, eq : Returns 1 if in1 equals in2, else returns zero.
==p, eqp : Returns in1 if it equals in2, else returns zero. Equivalent to in1 * (in1 == in2).
>=, gte : Returns 1 if in1 is equal to or greater than in2, else returns zero.
>=p, gtep : Returns in1 if in1 is equal to or greater than in2, else returns zero. Equivalent to
in1 * (in1 >= in2).

213

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

>p, gtp : Returns in1 if in1 is greater than in2, else returns zero. Equivalent to in1 * (in1 >
in2).
<, lt : Returns 1 if in1 is less than than in2, else returns zero.
<=, lte : Returns 1 if in1 is equal to or less than in2, else returns zero.
<=p, ltep : Returns in1 if in1 is equal to or less than in2, else returns zero. Equivalent to in1 *
(in1 <= in2).
<p, ltp : Returns in1 if in1 is less than in2, else returns zero. Equivalent to in1 * (in1 < in2).
max, maximum : The maximum of the inputs
min, minimum : The minimum of the inputs
!=, neq : Returns 1 if in1 does not equal in2, else returns zero.
step : Akin to the GLSL step operator: 0 is returned if in1 < in2, and 1 is returned otherwise.

Constant
constant : A constant value
degtorad, DEGTORAD : Multiplicative constant to convert degrees to radians
e, E : Base of the natural logarithm
f, float : Either outputs a constant float or converts its input value to a float
halfpi, HALFPI : One half of the constant pi
i, int : Either outputs a constant integer or converts its input value to an integer.
invpi, INVPI : One over pi
ln10, LN10 : The natural log of 10
ln2, LN2 : The natural log of 2
log10e, LOG10E : Log base 10 of the constant e
log2e, LOG2E : Log base 2 of the constant e
PHI, phi :

1 + 𝑠𝑞𝑟𝑡(5)
21+sqrt(5)​, the "golden" ratio
2

pi, PI : The constant pi, the ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter
radtodeg, RADTODEG : Multiplicative constant to convert radians to degrees
sqrt1_2, SQRT1_2 : One over the square root of 2

214

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

sqrt2, SQRT2 : The square root of 2
twopi, TWOPI : Two times pi

Declare
param, Param : Named parameters can be modified from outside the gen patcher. The first
argument specifies the name of the parameter, the second argument the initial value.

Expression
expr : Evaluates GenExpr code. Standard mathematical operators (+, -, *, / etc.) and gen
patcher operators can be used. See the GenExpr documentation for more detail.

Ignore
pass : Passes the value through unchanged.

Input-output
in : Defines an input for a gen patcher.
out : Send output from a gen patcher

Logic
!, not : An input value of zero returns 1, any other value returns zero.
&&, and : Returns 1 if both in1 and in2 are nonzero.
bool : Converts any nonzero value to 1 while zero passes through.
or, || : Returns 1 if either in1 or in2 are nonzero.
^^, xor : Returns 1 if one of in1 and in2 are nonzero, but not both.

Math

215

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

!%, rmod : Reverse modulo (remainder of second input / first input)
!-, rsub : Reverse subtraction (subtract first input from second)
%, mod : Modulo inputs (remainder of first input / second input)
+, add : Add inputs
-, sub : Subtract inputs
/, div : Divide inputs
absdiff : Compute the absolute difference between two inputs using the equation
𝑎𝑏𝑠(𝑖𝑛1 − 𝑖𝑛2)abs(in1 − in2).
cartopol : Convert Cartesian values to polar format. Angles are in radians.
*, mul : Multiply inputs
neg : Negate input
poltocar : Convert polar values to Cartesian format. Angles are in radians.
!/, rdiv : Reverse division (divide second input by first)

Numeric
abs : Negative values will be converted to positive counterparts.
ceil : Round the value up to the next higher integer
floor, trunc : Round the value down to the next lower integer (toward negative infinity)
fract : Return only the fractional component
sign : Positive input returns 1, negative input returns -1, zero returns itself.
trunc : Round the value down to the next smaller integer (toward zero)

Powers
exp : Raise the mathematical value e to a power
exp2 : Raise 2 to a power
fastexp : Approximated e to a power

216

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

fastpow : Approximated in1 to the power of in2
ln, log : The natural logarithm
log10 : The logarithm base 10 of the input
log2 : The logarithm base 2 of the input
pow : Raise in1 to the power of in2
sqrt : The square root of the input

Range
clamp, clip : Clamps the input value between specified min and max. Ranges are inclusive
(both min and max values may be output)
fold : Low and high values can be specified by arguments or by inlets. The default range is
0..1.
scale : Similar to the Max scale and MSP scale~ objects. Inputs are: 1) value to scale, 2) input
lower bound, 3), input upper bound, 4) output lower bound, 5) output upper bound, 6)
exponential curve. Default lower and upper bounds are zero and one; default exponential
curve is 1 (linear). No bound clamping is performed. The high and low values can be
reversed for inverted mapping.
wrap : Low and high values can be specified by arguments or by inlets. The default range is
0..1.

Route
?, switch : Selects between the second and third inputs according to the boolean value of
the first. If the first argument is true, the second argument will be output. Otherwise, the
third argument will be output.
gate : Similar to the MSP gate~ object. It takes an argument for number of outputs (one is
the default) and lets you choose which the incoming signal (at the right inlet) is sent to
according to the (integer) value in the left inlet. A value of zero or less to the left inlet will
choose no output; a value greater than the number of outlets will select the last outlet. Like
gate~, un-selected outlets will send zero.
mix : Mixes (interpolates) between inputs a and b according to the value of the third input t,
using linear interpolation. The factor (t) should vary between 0 (for a) and 1 (for b). If one
argument is given, it specifies the mix (interpolation) factor.

217

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

r, receive : Receive values from a named send. The send/receive pairs are only visible to
each other within the same gen patcher. They will not send across gen patchers or subpatchers.
s, send : Send values to a named receive. The send/receive pairs are only visible to each
other within the same gen patcher. They will not send across gen patchers or sub-patchers.
selector : Similar to the MSP selector~ object. In a Gen patcher it takes an argument for
number of choices (one is the default). In GenExpr, the number of choices is determined by
the number of arguments. The first input lets you choose which of the remaining inputs is
sent to the output. A value of zero or less to the first input will result in a zero signal at the
output; a value greater than the number of choices will select the last input.
smoothstep : Smoothstep is a scalar interpolation function commonly used in computer
graphics. The function interpolates smoothly between two input values based on a third one
that should be between the first two. The returned value is clamped between 0 and 1. The
slope (i.e. derivative) of the smoothstep function starts at 0 and ends at 0.

Subpatcher
gen : Gen subpatcher or abstraction
setparam : Set a param in a subpatcher from a parent patcher

Trigonometry
acos : The arc cosine of the input (returns radians)
acosh : The inverse hyperbolic cosine of the input
asin : The arc sine of the input (returns radians)
asinh : The inverse hyperbolic sine of the input
atan : The arc tangent of the input (returns radians)
atan2 : Returns the angle to the coordinate (x,y) in radians.
atanh : The inverse hyperbolic tangent of the input
cos : The cosine of the input (in radians)
cosh : The hyperbolic cosine of the input
degrees : convert radians to degrees

218

User Guide / Gen / Gen Common Operators

fastcos : The approximated cosine of the input (in radians)
fastsin : The approximated sine of the input (in radians)
fasttan : The approximated tangent of the input (in radians)
hypot : Returns the length of the vector to (in1, in2).
radians : convert degrees to radians
sin : The sine of the input (in radians)
sinh : The hyperbolic sine of the input
tan : The tangent of the input (in radians)
tanh : The hyperbolic tangent of the input

Waveform
noise : A random number generator

219

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

GenExpr
The Gen Patcher and the codebox Object

221

Language Basics
Parameters

221
223

Comments
Multiple Return Values
Defining GenExpr Functions

224
224
228

Operator Attributes
Abstractions as GenExpr Functions

230
232

Requiring GenExpr Files
Branching and Looping
GenExpr and Jitter Inputs

232
233
236

GenExpr and Jitter Coordinate Operations
Technical Notes

237
238

GenExpr is the internal language used by Gen patchers. It is used to describe computations in an
implementation agnostic manner. To perform actual computations, it is translated into machine
code for the CPU or GPU by the various Gen objects ( gen, gen~, jit.gen, etc.). The GenExpr
language can be used directly in Gen patchers with the expr and codebox objects. These objects
analyze the expressions written in them and automatically construct the the appropriate number of
inlets and outlets so that patchcords can be connected to the computations described within.

Note that there is absolutely no difference in terms of performance between describing
computations with object boxes and the GenExpr language. When a Gen patcher is compiled, it all
gets merged into a single representation, so use the approach that is most convenient for the
problem.

220

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

The Gen Patcher and the codebox Object
The GenExpr language is designed to complement the Max patching environment within Gen
patchers. It provides a parallel textual mechanism for describing computations to be used in concert
with the graphical patching paradigm of Max. As one example, the structural elements of userdefined GenExpr functions correspond closely to the structural elements of Max objects with their
notions of inlets, outlets, arguments and attributes. Furthermore, the GenExpr language has
keywords in , in1 , in2 , … and out , out1 , out2 , … that specifically refer to the inlets and
outlets of the expr or codebox the GenExpr code is embedded in.

Language Basics
The GenExpr language resembles C and JavaScript for simple expression statements; however,
semicolons are only necessary when there are multiple statements. The codeboxes below all contain
valid expressions in GenExpr. When there is a single expression with no assignment like in the far
left codebox, the assignment to out1 is implied. Notice that it also doesn’t have a semicolon at the
end. When there is only one statement, the semicolon is also implied.

221

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

For multi-line statements however, semicolons are required. The codebox on the left doesn’t have
them and will generate errors. The codebox on the right is correct.

The expr operator is functionally the same as a codebox but lacks the text editor features such as
syntax highlighting and multi-line text display and navigation. expr is most useful for short, one-line
expressions, saving the effort of patching together a sequence of objects together that operate as a
unit.

222

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

An expr or codebox determines its number of inlets and outlets by detecting the inN and outN
keywords where N is the inlet/outlet position. in1 and out1 are the left-most inlet and outlet
respectively. For convenience, the keywords in and out are equivalent to in1 and out1
respectively.

Almost every object that can be created in a Gen patcher is also available from within GenExpr as
either a function, a global variable, a declaration, or a constant. The number of inlets an object has
corresponds to the number of arguments a function takes. For example, the object atan2 has two
inlets and takes two arguments as follows:

out

= atan2( in1 ,

in2 )

Parameters
Parameters declared in GenExpr behave just like param operators in a patch. They can only be
declared in the main body of GenExpr code where inlets and outlets (inN and outN) exist because
they operate at the same level as object box Gen operators in the patcher.

223

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

A param declaration in GenExpr names a parameter and creates it if necessary. If there is a param
object box with the same name as a param declared in GenExpr, the GenExpr param will simply alias
the object box param. If there isn't a param object box with the same name, one will be implicitly
created. In the code above, offset aliases the object box param offset, while amp creates a new
global param.

Comments
Comments in GenExpr follow the C style syntax for both single-line and multi-line comments.
Single-line comments start withand multi-line comments are defined by.

// this is a comment, below we sample an input
pix = sample( in1 , norm);

Multiple Return Values
Just as object boxes can have multiple inlets and outlets, function in GenExpr can take multiple
arguments and can return multiple values. The object cartopol has two inlets and two outlets.
Similarly, in GenExpr the cartopol function takes two arguments and returns two values. In code,
this looks like r, theta = cartopol(x, y). Functions that return mutiple values can assign to a list of
variables. The syntax follows the pattern:

224

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

var1, var2, var3, … = <expression>

When a function returns multiple values but assigns to only one value, the unused return values are
simply ignored. When a return value is ignored, the GenExpr compiler eliminates any unnecessary
calculations. The function cartopol could be expanded out to

r, theta = sqrt(x*x+y*y), atan2(y, x)

If we remove theta and have instead

r = sqrt(x*x+y*y), atan2(y, x)

the compiler simplifies it to

r = sqrt(x*x+y*y)

In the reverse case where we only use theta, the Gen compiler will strip out the calculations for r

notused, theta = sqrt(x*x+y*y), atan2(y, x);
out

= theta;

effectively becomes

225

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

theta = atan2(y, x);
out = theta;

Even for more complex examples where the outputs share intermediate calculations, the compiler
eliminates unnecessary operations, so there is no performance penalty for not using all of a
function’s return values.

Just as the left-hand side list of variable names being assigned to are separated by commas, the
right-hand side list of expressions can also be separated by commas:

sum, diff = in1 + in2, in1 - in2
out1, out2 = diff, sum

If there are more values on the left-hand side than on the right-hand side, the extra variable names
are given a value of zero. For example,

out1, out2

=

in1

=

in1, 0

becomes

out1, out2

If any of the expressions in the right-hand side return more than one value, these additional values
will be ignored unless the expression is the last item in the right-hand side list. This is complex to
describe, but should be clear from these examples:

226

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

Unused Return Values The second return value gets discarded and cartopol is optimized:

r = cartopol(x, y)

Extra Assignment Values Zeros are assigned to extra assignment values:

x, y =

in1

becomes

x, y =

in1 ,

0

Multiple Return Values in an Expression List Only the last expression can return multiple values.
cartopol’s second return value discarded, as it is not the last expression in the right-hand side:

r,

out1

= cartopol(x, y),

in1

Here cartopol returns both values, since it is in the last position:

out1 , r, theta =

in1 , cartopol(x, y)

The same principle applies when expressions are used as arguments to a function call. In this
example, the two output values of poltocar connect to the two input values of min:

227

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

out

= min(poltocar( in1 ,

in2 ))

Defining GenExpr Functions
Defining new functions in GenExpr happens in much the same way as other familiar programming
languages. Since there are no types in GenExpr function arguments are specified simply with a
name. A basic function definition with an equivalent patcher representation looks like the following.
Note that functions must be declared before all statements:

A function returning multiple values looks like:

228

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

The cylinder operator in Jitter Gen objects is defined as:

While simple functions in GenExpr can be easily patched together, more involved functions like the
above cylinder definition start to become unwieldy, especially if the function is used several times
within the GenExpr code. This is the advantage of textual representations.

229

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

Operator Attributes

In Gen patchers, some objects have attributes like the Jitter Gen operator sample, which as a
boundmode attribute. In GenExpr, function arguments correspond to operator inlets and function

return values correspond to outlets. Attributes are set using a key/value style argument. For
example:

out

= sample( in , norm, boundmode= "mirror" );

will use a version of the sample operator with a mirroring boundary behavior. The attribute is set
with boundmode as the key and "mirror" as its value. Since the concept of Max messages doesn't
exist within Gen patchers, attributes for built-in operators are not dynamically modifiable. This
holds equally in GenExpr. Such attribute values must be constants. If the attribute takes a numerical
value, it cannot be assigned to from a variable.

Attributes in Function Definitions
Attributes can also be defined for function definitions. Here, attributes can be dynamic, behaving in
a similar manner to how setparam interacts with subpatcher parameters. Attributes can be defined
in one of two ways. With one syntax, the attribute is defined and given a default in the function
signature. With the other, a Param object is declared in the function, adding the name of the
parameter as an attribute to the function.

230

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

With the first method, only the default value of the attribute can be defined. With the second
method, other properties such as minimum and maximum values for the attribute can be set. By
declaring a param object, you get more control over how the attribute operates.

As with built-in operators, attributes of function definitions can be set with key-value syntax. In the
above example, the amp attribute is given a value of 0.5 while the offset attribute is given a
value of in1 * 2 , which is an expression that is not constant but valid because func is a function
definition. Note, however, that the offset attribute has minimum and maximum values defined,
so any expression assigned to it will be clamped to that range.

231

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

Abstractions as GenExpr Functions
Structurally, GenExpr functions are equivalent to Gen patchers. Both can have inputs, outputs and
named parameters. In GenExpr, Gen patchers save as abstractions (.gendsp or .genjit files) can be
used as functions. When the GenExpr interpreter encounters a function it can't find the definition
of, it will use the current Max search paths to look for a Gen abstraction with the name of the
function.

out1

= myAbstraction( in1 )

There is no definition of the function myAbstraction in the above code and it isn't a built-in
operator, so Max will try to find a Gen abstraction with that name. The GenExpr interpreter will
look for myAbstraction.gendsp in the case of gen~ or myAbstraction.genjit in the case of the
Jitter Gen objects jit.gen, jit.pix, or jit.gl.pix.

There are some caveats with using abstractions as GenExpr functions. GenExpr function names
must be valid identifiers. An identifier in GenExpr is a sequence of characters starting with a letter
or an underscore ( [a-z] , [A-Z] , _ ) followed by any number of letters, numbers or underscores (
[a-z] , [A-Z] , [0-9] , _ ). It is not uncommon for Max subpatchers to have other chartacters

such as ~ or . in them. These are invalid characters when it comes to GenExpr function names, so
if they're used in the name of a Gen abstraction, they cannot be used as GenExpr functions.

Requiring GenExpr Files
When defining operators in GenExpr, it can be handy to keep them in a separate file so that they
can be reused frequently without having to constantly re-type the operator definition in a codebox.
To include GenExpr operators defined in a separate file, use the require operator. The require
operator takes the name of a .genexpr file and loads its definitions. The following are all valid
ways to require a .genexpr file:

232

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

require( "mylib" )
require( "mylib" );
require "mylib"
require "mylib" ;

In the above code, calling require triggers the codebox to look for the file 'mylib.genexpr' using
the Max search path. Required .genexpr files can also require other files. If a file is required more
than once, it will only be loaded once.

GenExpr files can be created and edited using the built-in Max text editor. If a GenExpr file is
required in a gen object and the file is edited and saved, the Gen object will detect that a file it
depends on has changed through filewatching and recompile itself to reflect the new changes.

Branching and Looping
Branching and looping is supported in GenExpr with if/else , for and while constructs. if
statements can be chained together using else if an arbitrary number of times such that
different blocks of code will be executed depending on different conditions. For example:

if (in > 0.5) {
out = cos(in * pi);
}
else if (in > 0.25) {
out = sin( in *pi);
}
else {
out = cos(in * pi) * sin(in * pi);
}

Note that in the Jitter gen objects, if statements with vector-valued conditions will only use the
first element of the vector to determine whether a block of code should be tested or not. while
loops in GenExpr are similar to those in many other languages:

233

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

i = 0;
val = 0;
while (i < 10) {
i += 1;
// accumulate
val += i;
}
out

= val;

for loops are also similar to this in many other languages although there is no ++ operator in

GenExpr to increment a loop counter. Instead, += can be used:

val = 0 ;
for (i= 0; i < 10; i += 1) {
// accumulate
val += i;
}
out

= val;

Since GenExpr is compiled on-the-fly, it can be easy to make a programming mistake and create an
infinite loop. All of the gen objects have protections against infinite loops, so while an infinite loop
might slow things down, it won't cause Max to get stuck and freeze.

Also, note that in many cases values in GenExpr are floating point, even loop counters. Floating
point numbers can't exactly represent every number, sometimes a little fudge factor to account for
this might be necessary. For example, this loop:

234

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

val = 0;
for (i = 0; i <= 1; i += 0.05) {
// accumulate
val += i;
}
out = val;

will likely not reach 1.0 despite the <= operator because of floating point precision. Instead, write
something like:

val = 0;
for (i = 0 ; i <= 1.04 ; i +=
// accumulate
val += i;
}
out

0.05) {

= val;

to ensure that the i variable goes all the way to 1.

Continue and Break
With looping constructs, GenExpr supports break and continue statements. break causes an
early exit from a loop while continue causes the loop to start the next iteration without finishing
the current one.

235

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

val = 0;
for (i = 0 ; i < 10; i += 1) {
if (val > 20) {
// bail early
break;
}
val += i;
}
out = val;

val = 0 ;
for (i = 0 ;i < 10; i +=
if (val == 6) {

1) {

// skip an iteration
continue;
}
val += i;
}
out = val;

GenExpr and Jitter Inputs
Jitter Gen objects take both Jitter matrices (jit.matrix) and/or textures (jit.gl.texture) depending on
the object. Within the Gen patcher the operator in represents both the input matrix or texture in
its entirety and the current cell of that input being processed. In most cases, the in operator
represents the current cell being processed. The only time where it represents the entire input is
with the sample and nearest operators. Only an in operator can be connected to the left input of
sample and nearest, which are used to grab data from arbitrary locations within the input. The same
holds true when sample and nearest are used in GenExpr.

236

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

When GenExpr code is compiled, the inputs to sample and nearest are validated to ensure that their
first arguments are actually Gen patcher inputs and an error thrown if this isn't the case. The
validation process can track inputs even through function calls so sample and nearest can be used
within functions without issue.

GenExpr and Jitter Coordinate Operations
The coordinate operations in Jitter Gen patchers (norm, snorm, cell, and dim) are special-case
operators that are a hybrid betwen operator and global variable. There are two equally valid
syntaxes for using these operators:

out1

= norm * dim();

In the first instance above, norm is syntactically a global variable while dim is syntactically a
function call. All of the coordinate operators follow this convention.

237

User Guide / Gen / GenExpr

Technical Notes
GenExpr is a type-less language. Variables are given types automatically by the compiler depending
on the Gen domain and the Gen object’s inputs. Gen variables are also local-to-scope by default so
they don’t have to be declared with a keyword like var as in JavaScript. Note that GenExpr has no
array notation [index] as there is currently no notion of an array structure.

238

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

gen~ Operators
Buffer
Convert

239
241

Constants
DSP

241
241

Feedback
FFT

242
243

Filter
Global
Integrator

243
244
244

Numeric
Waveform

245
245

See Also

245

The following Gen operators are unique to the gen~ object, and operate in the audio domain.

Buffer
buffer : References a named buffer~ object in the gen~ object's parent patch. The first
argument specifies a name by which to refer to this data in other objects in the gen patcher
(such as peek and poke); the second optional argument specifies the name of the external
buffer~ object to reference (if ommitted, the first argument name is used). The first outlet
sends the length of the buffer in samples; the second outlet sends the number of channels.
channels : The number of channels of a data/buffer object. The first argument should be a
name of a data or buffer object in the gen patcher.
cycle : An interpolating oscillator that reads repeatedly through one cycle of a sine wave. By
default it is driven by a frequency input, but if the @index attribute is set to 'phase', it can
be driven by a phase input instead.
data : Stores an array of sample data (64-bit floats) usable for sampling, wavetable synthesis
and other purposes. The first argument specifies a name by which to refer to this data in
other objects in the gen patcher (such as peek and poke); the second optional argument
specifies the length of the array (default 512 samples); and the third optional argument

239

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

specifies the number of channels (default 1). The first outlet sends the length of the buffer
in samples; the second outlet sends the number of channels.
dim : The length (in samples) of a data/buffer object. The first argument should be a name of
a data or buffer object in the gen patcher.
lookup : Index a data/buffer object using a signal, for waveshaping. The first argument
should be a name of a data or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second argument
specifies the number of output channels. Input signals in the range -1 to 1 are mapped to
the full size of the data/buffer, with linear interpolation. The last inlet specifies a channel
offset (default 0).
nearest : Multi-channel lookup a data/buffer object (no interpolation). The first argument
should be a name of a data or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second argument
specifies the number of output channels. The input phase ranges from 0 to 1, and wraps
outside this range. The last inlet specifies a channel offset (default 0).
peek : Read values from a data/buffer object. The first argument should be a name of a data
or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second argument specifies the number of output
channels. The first inlet specifes a sample index to read (no interpolation); indices out of
range return zero. The last inlet specifies a channel offset (default 0).
poke : Write values into a data/buffer object. The first argument should be a name of a data
or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second argument (or third inlet if omitted) specifies
which channel to use. The first inlet specifies a value to write, while the second inlet
specifies the sample index within the data/buffer. If the index is out of range, no value is
written.
sample : Linear interpolated multi-channel lookup of a data/buffer object. The first
argument should be a name of a data or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second
argument specifies the number of output channels. The last inlet specifies a channel offset
(default 0).
splat : Mix values into a data/buffer object, with linear interpolated overdubbing. The first
argument should be a name of a data or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second
argument (or third inlet if omitted) specifies which channel to use. The first inlet specifies a
value to write, while the fractional component of the second inlet specifies a phase (0..1)
within the data/buffer (indices out of range will wrap). Splat writes with linear interpolation
between samples, and mixes new values with the existing data (overdubbing).
wave : Wavetable synthesis using a data/buffer object. The first argument should be a name
of a data or buffer object in the gen patcher. The second argument specifies the number of
output channels. The first inlet specifies phase (0..1), while the second and third inlets
specify start/end sample positions within the data/buffer. The last inlet specifies a channel
offset (default 0).

240

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

Convert
atodb : Convert linear amplitude to deciBel value
dbtoa : Convert deciBel value to linear amplitude
ftom : Frequency given in Hertz is converted to MIDI note number (0-127). Fractional note
numbers are supported. The second input sets the tuning base (default 440).
mstosamps : Convert period in milliseconds to samples
mtof : MIDI note number (0-127) is converted to frequency in Hertz. Fractional note
numbers are supported. The second input sets the tuning base (default 440).
sampstoms : Convert period in samples to milliseconds

Constants
fftfullspect, FFTFULLSPECT : The pfft~ full spectrum flag (0/1)
ffthop, FFTHOP : The pfft~ FFT hop size
fftoffset, FFTOFFSET : The pfft~ FFT offset
fftsize, FFTSIZE : The pfft~ FFT frame size
1000
samplerate, SAMPLERATE : The DSP samplerate. Will return @𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑣𝑎𝑙
@interval1000​for

event-rate gen.
vectorsize, VECTORSIZE : The DSP vectorsize. Will return 1 for event-rate gen.

DSP
fixdenorm : This operator detects denormal numbers and replaces them with zero. Note: As
of Max 6.0 the x87 control flags are set to flush to zero and disable exception handling in
audio processing, so denormal fixing should only be required for exported code. A denormal
number is a floating point value very close to zero (filling the underflow gap). Calculations
with denormal values can be up to 100 times more expensive, so it is often beneficial to
replace them with zeroes. Denormals often occur in feedback loops with multipliers, such as
filters, delays and exponential decays. Denormal detection is based on a bitmask. Note that
feedback operators in gen~ (delay, history) apply fixdenorm to their input signals by default.

241

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

fixnan : This operator replaces NaNs with zero. A NaN (Not a Number) is a floating point
data value which represents an undefined or unrepresentable value, such as the result of
dividing by zero. Computations on NaNs produce more NaNs, and so it is often preferable
to replace the NaN with a zero value. Note that division and modulo operators in gen~
protect against generating NaNs by default.
isdenorm : This operator detects denormal numbers and returns 1 if the input is denormal,
and zero otherwise. Note: As of Max 6.0 the x87 control flags are set to flush to zero and
disable exception handling in audio processing, so denormal fixing should only be required
for exported code. A denormal number is a floating point value very close to zero (filling the
underflow gap). Calculations with denormal values can be up to 100 times more expensive,
so it is often beneficial to replace them with zeroes. Denormals often occur in feedback
loops with multipliers, such as filters, delays and exponential decays. Denormal detection is
based on a bitmask. Note that feedback operators in gen~ (delay, history) apply fixdenorm
to their input signals by default.
isnan : This operator detects the presence of NaN values, returning 1 if the input is NaN,
and zero otherwise. A NaN (Not a Number) is a floating point data value which represents
an undefined or unrepresentable value, such as the result of dividing by zero. Computations
on NaNs produce more NaNs, and so it is often preferable to replace the NaN with a zero
value. Note that division and modulo operators in gen~ protect against generating NaNs by
default.
t60 : Given an input T, returns a number X such that, after T multiplications of a signal by X,
that signal would be attenuated by 60 decibels. Roughly, -60db = 0db * pow(X, T). This
could be used as a per-sample multiplier (X) to ensure a decay time (of T samples), for
example. The name t60 is borrowed from the RT60 time used to measure reverberation
time, which specifies the time taken for a signal to decay by 60db, as an approximation of
fading to inaudibility.
t60time : Estimates the decay time (in samples) of a given decay factor. That is, given a
multiplier X, returns a number T such that, after T multiplications of a signal by X, that signal
would be attenuated by 60 decibels. It is the dual of the t60 object.

Feedback
delay : Delays a signal by a certain amount of time (specified in samples). The first argument
specifies the maximum delay time (in samples, default samplerate). The second argument
specifies the number of tap inlet/outlet pairs (default 1). The first inlet is the signal to be
delayed. Additional inlets specify the delay time per tap (in samples). With @feedback 1,
like history, delay allows feedback loops in the patcher, but minium delay is 1 sample. With

242

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

@feedback 0, minimum delay time is zero samples (or more if @interp is cubic, spline, or

spline6)
history : The history operator allows feedback in the gen patcher through the insertion of a
single-sample delay. The first argument is an optional name for the history operator, which
allows it to also be set externally (in the same way as the param operator). The second
argument specifies an initial value of stored history (defaults to zero).

FFT
fftinfo : fftinfo gets constant data about the FFT frames in a patcher loaded by pfft~. If it is
used in a patcher that is not loaded by pfft~, it returns default constants instead.

Filter
change : Returns the sign of the difference between the current and previous input: 1 if the
input is increasing, -1 if decreasing, and 0 if unchanging.
dcblock : A one-pole high-pass filter to remove DC components. Equivalent to the GenExpr:
History x1, y1; y = in1 - x1 + y1*0.9997; x1 = in1; y1 = y; out1 = y;

delta : Returns the difference between the current and previous input.
interp : Smoothly mix between inputs, according to an interpolation factor in the range of 0
to 1 (first inlet). The @mode attribute can choose between linear or cosine interpolation to
mix between two additional inlets, cubic or spline to mix between four inlets, and spline6 to
mix between six inlets. The default mode is linear.
latch : Conditionally passes or holds input. The first inlet is the 'input' and the second inlet is
the 'control'. When the control is non-zero, the input value is passed through. When the
control is zero, the previous input value is output. It can be used to periodically sample &
hold a source signal with a simpler trigger logic than the sah operator.
phasewrap : Wrap input to the range -pi to +pi
sah : The first inlet is the 'input' and the second inlet is the 'control'. When the control
makes a transition from being at or below the trigger value to being above the trigger
threshold, the input is sampled. The sampled value is output until another control transition
occurs, at which point the input is sampled again. The default threshold value is 0, but can
be specified as the last inlet/argument. The @init attribute sets the initial previous value
to compare to (default 0).

243

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

slide : Use the slide operator for envelope following and lowpass filtering. Related to the
MSP slide~ object.

Global
elapsed : The number of samples elapsed since the patcher DSP began, or since the last
reset.
mc_channel : If used within a patcher inside mc.gen~, the mc_channel operator will return
the current channel index. Otherwise, it always returns 1.
mc_channelcount : If used within a patcher inside mc.gen~, the mc_channelcount operator
will return the channel count of the mc.gen~. Otherwise, it always returns 1.
voice : If used within a poly~ patcher, the voice operator will return the current voice index
(similar to thispoly~). Otherwise, it always returns 1.
voicecount : If used within a poly~ patcher, the voicecount operator will return the current
voice count. Otherwise, it always returns 1.

Integrator
*=, mulequals : The object multiplies by, and then outputs, an internal value. This occurs at
sample-rate, so the stored value can grow very large or very small, very fast. The value to be
multiplied by is specified by either the first inlet or argument. The internal sum can be reset
to the minimum by sending a nonzero value to the right-most inlet. The minimum value is 0
by default, but can be changed with the @min attribute. An optional maximum value can be
specified with the @max attribute; values will wrap at the maximum.
+=, accum, plusequals : The object adds to, and then outputs, an internal sum. This occurs at
sample-rate, so the sum can grow very large, very fast. The value to be added is specified by
either the first inlet or argument. The internal sum can be reset to the minimum by sending
a nonzero value to the right-most inlet. The minimum value is 0 by default, but can be
changed with the @min attribute. An optional maximum value can be specified with the
@max attribute; values will wrap at the maximum.
counter : Accumulates and outputs a stored count, similarly to Max's counter object, but
triggered at sample-rate. The amount to accumulate per sample is set by the first input
(incr). The count can be reset by a non-zero value in the second input (reset). The third inlet
(max) sets a maximum value; the counter will wrap if it reaches this value. However if the
maximum value is set to 0 (the default), the counter will assume no limit and count
indefinitely. The first outlet outputs the current count, the second outlet outputs 1 when

244

User Guide / Gen / gen~ Operators

the count wraps at the maximum and zero otherwise, and the third outlet outputs the
number of wraps (the carry count).

Numeric
round : Returns the integral value that is nearest to the input, with halfway cases rounded
away from zero.

Waveform
phasor : A non-bandlimited sawtooth-waveform signal generator which can be used as LFO
audio signal or a sample-accurate timing/control signal.
rate : The rate operator time-scales an input phase (such as from a phasor) by a multiplier.
Multipliers less than 1 create several ramps per phase cycle.
train : train generates a pulse signal whose period is specifiable in terms of samples. The
first input sets the pulse period (in samples). The second input sets the pulse width (default
0.5). The third inlet sets the phase of the 'on' portion (default 0.)
triangle : A triangle/ramp wavetable with input to change phase offset of the peak value.
The phase ranges from 0 to 1 (and wraps outside these values). With a duty cycle of 0, it
produces a descending sawtooth; with a duty cycle of 1 it produces ascending sawtooth;
with a duty cycle of 0.5 it produces a triangle waveform. Output values always bounded in 0
to 1.

See Also
mg_gen

245

User Guide / Gen / Jitter Operators

Jitter Operators
Color
Coordinate

246
246

Quaternion
Sampling
Surface

246
247
247

Vector

247

The following Gen operators are unique to the jit.gen, jit.pix, and jit.gl.pix objects - unlike the
Common Gen Operators , they are only used in the matrix/texture domain.

Color
hsl2rgb : Convert HSL to RGB, preserving alpha
rgb2hsl : Convert RGB to HSL, preserving alpha

Coordinate
cell : Cell coordinates of input matrix [0, dim-1]
dim : Dimensions of input matrix
norm : Normalized coordinates of input matrix [0, 1]
snorm : Signed normalized coordinates of input matrix [-1, 1]

Quaternion
qconj : Get the conjugate of a quaternion.
qmul : Multiply quaternion inputs
qrot : Rotate a vector by a quaternion. The equation of the rotation is 𝑞 ∗ 𝑣 ∗ 𝑞−1
q ∗ v ∗ q−1.

246

User Guide / Gen / Jitter Operators

Sampling
nearest : Nearest neighbor sample a matrix at a given coordinate (normalized). Nearest has a
boundmode attribute that can be set to wrap, mirror or clamp.
nearestpix : Nearest neighbor sample a matrix at a given coordinate (in pixels). Nearest has a
boundmode attribute that can be set to wrap, mirror or clamp.
sample : Sample a matrix at a given coordinate (normalized) with linear interpolation. Sample
has a boundmode attribute that can be set to wrap, mirror or clamp.
samplepix : Sample a matrix at a given coordinate (in pixels) with linear interpolation. Pixel
centers are located at PIXEL+0.5. For example, the center of the upper-left pixel is (0.5, 0.5).
Samplepix has a boundmode attribute that can be set to wrap, mirror or clamp.

Surface
circle : Equation of a circle taking input coordinates ranging from [0, 1]
cone : Equation of a cone taking input coordinates ranging from [0, 1]
cylinder : Equation of a cylinder taking input coordinates ranging from [0, 1]
plane : Equation of a plane taking input coordinates ranging from [0, 1]
sphere : Equation of a sphere taking input coordinates ranging from [0, 1]
torus : Equation of a torus taking input coordinates ranging from [0, 1]

Vector
concat : Concatenate vector values into a larger vector
cross : Take the cross product of two vectors
dot : Take the dot product of two vectors
faceforward : Return a vector pointing in the same direction as another
length : Returns the length of a vector
normalize : Normalize a vector to unit length
reflect : Reflect a vector off a surface defined by a normal

247

User Guide / Gen / Jitter Operators

refract : Refract a vector through a surface defined by a normal and a refraction index
rotor : Return a quaternion that can rotate the first input into the second.
swiz : Unpack and remap vector components
vec : Pack scalar values into a vector

248

User Guide / Jitter

Jitter

249

User Guide / Jitter / Depth Testing and Layering

Depth Testing and Layering
Depth Testing
Layering

250
251

Blending
Combining the Techniques

252
253

Composing refers to the various ways of drawing multiple objects in the same graphics context.
One object might partially obscure another, or another object might be visible behind a transparent
object. Compositing generally uses one of two techniques: depth testing and layering. To facilitate
these techniques, all Jitter objects representing entities in a rendered scene share the attributes
@layer , @depth_enable , @blend_enable , and @blend .

Depth Testing
Depth testing models the way objects closer to the camera lens obscure objects further away. Every
pixel that would be drawn writes its distance from the camera—its depth—into the depth buffer.
When a new object is drawn, the renderer checks the depth (distance from the camera) of every
pixel and compares that with the depth of whatever pixels may have been previously drawn in the
same location. If the new pixel is closer it will be drawn, otherwise it will be discarded.

By default, every context has a depth buffer. Whether or not a context has a depth buffer can be
set on jit.window and jit.pwindow with the @depthbuffer attribute. Additionally, every jit.gl.*
object that supports depth testing has a @depth_enable attribute. This is on by default, but can be
used to control depth testing on a per-object basis.

250

User Guide / Jitter / Depth Testing and Layering

When @depth_enable is disabled, the object will no longer write to the depth buffer, and the renderer will not use
depth information when compositing the object into the scene.

Layering
Layering gives you direct control over the order in which objects are drawn. Objects in a lower layer
are rendered first, then objects in higher layers. By default, all 3D objects are added to layer 0, and
therefore their drawing order is indeterminate. You can change the @layer attribute to move the
object to a different layer, where higher values are drawn on top of lower values.

Be careful to disable depth testing with @depth_enable 0 if you want to use layering,
otherwise depth testing will override the layer value. Unlike other jit.gl.* objects
the jit.gl.layer object disables depth testing by default.

251

User Guide / Jitter / Depth Testing and Layering

The red layer (3) is drawn on top of the green layer (2) which is drawn on top of the blue layer (1)

Blending
Enable blending to allow overlapping layers to blend together. Blending is disabled by default, but
you can enable it for relevant objects by setting @blend_enable 1 . You can change the way pixels
from different layers mix together by changing the blend mode, controlled with the @blend
attribute. By default, blend is set to alpha blend, which uses the alpha value of the higher layer to
determine how much of the higher and lower pixels to blend together. An alpha value of 0 means
the pixel in the top layer is completely transparent, while an alpha value of 1 means the top pixel is
totally opaque. Images and movie files that contain alpha values (e.g. PNG, TIFF, Animation codec,
and ProRes 4444) can be displayed with proper transparency by texturing an object (like jit.gl.layer
or jit.gl.gridshape) with alpha blend enabled. Unlike other jit.gl.* objects the jit.gl.layer object
enables blending by default.

252

User Guide / Jitter / Depth Testing and Layering

An image with an alpha channel, rendered on top of a video, using alpha blending

Combining the Techniques
Drawing an overlay
Layering and blending can work together with depth testing to draw a transparent overlay on top of
a 3D scene. If objects in the scene have @depth_enable 1 , while elements in the transparent
overlay have @depth_enable 0 , @blend_enable 1 , and @layer 1 , then the overlay will always
be drawn on top of elements in the 3D scene. Whether or not the overlay is transparent or opaque
will be determined by the alpha values of pixels in the overlay.

Drawing transparent objects.
Sometimes, you want to have a transparent object in your scene that still uses the depth buffer.
However, even if you give this object a transparent texture, it will still block objects behind it
because the it still writes to the depth buffer. The solution is to set @depth_write 0 and
@layer 1 on the transparent object. With @depth_write 0 , the object will not update the depth

buffer with its current depth values. That way, the object will be obscured by opaque objects in the
scene, but other objects will be visible through your transparent object.

253

User Guide / Jitter / Depth Testing and Layering

A transparent torus ensconcing a rubber duck. By disabling depth_write, other objects are still visible through the
transparent object.

254

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

Geometry Objects
Learning & Examples

255

Half-edge Structure
Creating Geometries

256
257

Remeshing, Subdividing, Decimating
Texture Cooridinates and Surface Normals
Effect Chains

258
259
259

Drawing Geometries
Asynchrony

261
261

The jit.geom family of objects, like jit.geom.shape, are a specialized group of Jitter objects
designed to work with Half-edge Geometry Structures. This way of representing geometries makes
certain kinds of geometry manipulations much easier and more efficient:

Generating shapes - Use jit.geom.shape to create simple geometries with an arbitrary
number of subdivisions.
Vertex adjustment - The jit.geom.remesh object lets you rearrange the vertices of a
geometry, making them more evenly distributed without changing the overall shape. You
can add and remove vertices with jit.geom.subdivide and jit.geom.decimate.
Transformations - Smooth out a geometry with jit.geom.smooth, add roughness or
procedural displacement with jit.geom.dimples and jit.geom.displace, or perform more
radical transformations with jit.geom.twist, jit.geom.waves, and jit.geom.xform.
Property generation - Create dynamic, adjustable shapes with lifelike surface properties,
using jit.geom.texgen and jit.geom.normgen to generate texture coordinates and surface
normals.

Learning & Examples
Follow the Jitter Geometry tutorial series, or check out some examples of what's possible with
these objects:

255

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

Example

Description

Contours

Example of how to make a Jitter geometry look hand-drawn

Fractals

Fractal geometries using jit.geom + JavaScript

Point Cloud

Generate a point cloud using jit.geom

Thickness

Extrude triangles to create volumes

Half-edge Structure
The Jitter geometry objects represent geometries using a half-edge structure. This structure makes
it easy to determine which vertices are adjacent to each other, so that manipulations like extruding,
decimating, and remeshing are all possible. The basic idea is that each vertex should maintain a
pointer to the next vertex in the shape. This pointer from one vertex to the next is the half-edge
that gives the structure its name. Each half-edge also has a twin (sometimes called its opposite) that
points from the next vertex back to the original. These two half-edges together make up one edge.

A single triangular face, in a half-edge representation.

One more requirement completes the definition of the half-edge structure, that following the halfedges from one vertex to the next must loop around one face of the 3D shape. You can view the
structure of a half-edge geometry as text using jit.geom.todict, which converts the geometry to a
structured dictionary.

256

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

A half-edge structure as a dictionary

Creating Geometries
Use the jit.geom.shape object to create a simple geometry, like an icosphere, torus, or cube. You can
also use the jit.geom.togeom object to convert a Jitter matrix of triangles into a geometry. Like you
see here, it can work with the output of jit.gl.model, but it works just as well with shapes from
jit.gl.gridshape, or with any kind of triangular mesh.

Use jit.geom.togeom to convert a Jitter matrix to a geometry

257

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

If you're not working with the output of jit.gl.model or jit.gl.gridshape, then you'll need
to make sure that the input to jit.geom.togeom follows the standard for 3D surfaces as
represented by a Jitter matrix.

Remeshing, Subdividing, Decimating
You can adjust the shape of a Jitter geometry using various objects.

Object

Description

jit.geom.remesh

Evenly redistribute vertexes without changing the overall shape

jit.geom.subdivide

Subdivide each face into multiple faces, creating new vertices without
changing the overall shape

jit.geom.decimate

Combine vertices, reducing the number of vertices wihtout changing the
overall shape

jit.geom.smooth

Smooth out the surface vertices, which will distort the surface of the shape

Texture coordinates
The jit.geom.remesh algorithm cannot generate texture coordinates. Once a geometry passes
through this object, there's no guarantee that the texture coordinates will contain anything useful.
You can try to use jit.geom.texgen to generate new texture coordinates, although these won't
necessarily correspond to the originals.

258

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

Texture coordinates are no longer usable after remesh

Texture Cooridinates and Surface Normals
Generate new texture coordinates for a Jitter geometry with jit.geom.texgen. The jit.geom.texgen
objects has a few different algorithms that it can use to compute new texture coordinates, based on
the shape of the geometry. Generate new surface normals with jit.geom.normgen.

Effect Chains
When chaining multiple Jitter geometry transformation effects together (effects like jit.geom.twist
or jit.geom.dimples), you can use the @bypass attribute to route geometries through an object
unchanged. This is the right way to work with geometry effects.

259

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

Geometry routed through a jit.geom.twist and a jit.geom.waves, using @bypass to skip an effect

Generally, it's not a good idea to treat geometry objects like matrix or texture processing objects,
when it comes to using a regular gate object to route geometry computations.

The wrong way to bypass a geometry effect

The jit.geom objects are careful to only trigger new computation when necessary. Unlike video
effects, where every new frame passes through the whole render chain, jit.geom objects only
trigger new computation when their internal state changes. When you change the state of the gate
object in this example, you're not changing the state of any jit.geom object. This won't trigger
any new computation, and you won't actually see any change to the geometry.

260

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

Of course, you could bang the first object in the jit.geom chain to re-trigger
computation manually.

Drawing Geometries
You can draw a Jitter geometry using jit.gl.mesh, after having first converted the geometry to a
matrix. The jit.geom.tomesh is slightly more performant, and should be used if you're trying to draw
a geometry directly with jit.gl.mesh. If you want to use the geometry for some other purpose, where
a Jitter matrix would be more useful, there is alto the jit.geom.tomatrix object to convert a
geometry to a full matrix.

If you connect jit.geom.tomesh to a jit.gl.mesh object, it will automatically set the
@drawmode attribute of jit.gl.mesh to draw the geometry correctly. Otherwise, you
should set @drawmode triangles on jit.gl.mesh to draw a geometry.

Both of these objects have an attribute @auto_normals that will compute surface normals, which
may make an explicit jit.geom.normgen unnecessary.

Asynchrony
By default, the Jitter geometry objects are asynchronous. They process their input on a special
thread reserved for geometry calculations. This allows them to handle large, complex inputs,
without slowing down video, audio, or other computations. When a Jitter geometry object is
actively processing, its appearance will change to show that it's currently working.

261

User Guide / Jitter / Geometry Objects

When a Jitter geometry object is actively processing, it shows zebra stripes.

Because of this potential asynchrony, when you change a Jitter geometry object's attributes, or
when you send it a new geometry, the result may not come out of the object's outlet right away.
You can bypass this behavior by setting the @async attribute to 0 .

262

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Engine

Graphics Engine
Changing the Graphics Engine

263

Engine Comparison

263

The Graphics Engine manages the interface between Max and the real time graphics API that
interacts with your computer's GPU. It's an abstraction layer that translates your instructions about
rendering a 3D or 2D scene into hardware instructions that your computer can understand.
Operations like positioning virtual objects, calculating light and shadow, running postprocessing
effects, and simulating physics interactions are all handled by the graphics engine.

Changing the Graphics Engine
Under most circumstances, it's not necessary to change the graphics engine. Currently Jitter ships
with two engine variants, legacy OpenGL ( gl2 ) and core profile OpenGL ( glcore ). As of Max 8.5
the default graphics engine used by Jitter is glcore , which was formerly termed gl3 . Users
needing legacy behavior can set the Graphics Engine preference to gl2 .

Engine Comparison
For a full engine comparison, see the legacy OpenGL discussion. Summarized briefly, the following
have been deprecated:

Fixed-function vertex and fragment processing, as the rendering pipeline is now fully
programmable.

263

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Engine

Immediate-mode vertex attribute specification and client-side vertex arrays.
The GL_QUAD and GL_POLYGON primitive types.
Fixed-function lighting, materials and color materials, fixed-function shadow mapping and
bump mapping.

264

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Graphics Processing
Graphics Contexts
Cameras
Geometry

265
268
270

Materials
Lights

273
276

Instancing
Depth Buffer
Handles

276
278
278

Models

279

Whether you're using 3D modeling software, a game engine, or writing your own shaders, creating
and displaying Computer Graphics invovles many of the same concepts. Max has many capabilities
when it comes to working with computer graphics, and this document will describe how to make
use of them.

Graphics Contexts
In order to draw, you must have some place to draw to. The Max object jit.world is the simplest way
to get a graphics context. This object wraps together many other, lower level objects. The two most
important of these objects are jit.window, which creates a graphics context in a separate window,
and jit.gl.render, which can be used to direct Max to render a single frame of graphics.

265

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Creating a simple graphics context with {jit.world}

While jit.world creates a separate window, you can also use the jit.pworld object, which has similar
functionality as jit.world, except the graphics context appears as a frame in the Max patcher.

Context names
Unlike some Max objects, Jitter objects that deal with graphics processing don't need to connect to
each other to pass data around. Most graphics processing objects (usually with the jit.gl prefix)
refer to their parent context by name. Even if you don't assign an explicit name to your graphics
context using the @name attribute, Max will create a unique name automatically when you create it.
If you add a graphics processing object to your patcher, by default it will bind to whatever graphics
context is available in the current patcher. However, if you have multiple graphics contexts in a
single patcher, you can use an attribute to bind the object specifically to a particular context. Most
objects use the @drawto attribute to choose their parent context explicitly. An alternative way to
set @drawto is to provide the context name as the first argument following the object name.

266

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Using `@drawto` to pick a parent context

Offscreen contexts
It is possible to hide the window created by jit.world using the @visible attribute. However, the
best way to create an offscreen context is with the jit.gl.node object. Using the @name attribute,
you can give jit.gl.node a name, and then use the @drawto attribute to bind objects to the
jit.gl.node. Finally, enable texture capture with @capture 1 on the jit.gl.node object. In this
configuration, the jit.gl.node object functions as an offscreen render target. The output of jit.gl.node
will be a texture to which you can add postprocessing.

267

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Capturing to an offscreen context with {jit.gl.node}

Note that here, since the jit.gl.gridshape is drawing to the context owned by jit.gl.node, the shape is
not visible in the window context owned by jit.gl.world. However, for jit.gl.node to function, it must
still have its own parent context. So the jit.world object must be present for this patcher to
function.

Cameras
Create a camera with the jit.gl.camera object. This object has attributes for managing rendering
according to perspective.

Attribute

Type

Description

@lookat

vec3

Point the camera towards this position. Setting this attribute will
override @direction .

@position

vec3

The position of the camera. Combines with @lookat to determine the
orientation of the view.

268

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

@rotatexyz

vec3

Rotates the camera. Setting @direction or @lookat will
override this, since they are all three different ways of defining
the orientation of the camera.

@near_clip

float

Only vertices further from the camera than this minimum
distance will be rendered.

@far_clip

float

Only vertices nearer to the camera than this maximum distance
will be rendered.

@lens_angle

float

The angle between the limits of the camera's view. A narrower

(degrees)

lens angle increases the size of visible objects, while decreasing
the amount of the scene that can be seen.

enum

Manages camera perspective. 0 , the default value, imitates

(int)

natural perspective vision by making more distant objects appear

@ortho

smaller. 1 instead uses orthographic projection, in which all
objects are the same size on matter their distance. 2 is also
orthorgraphic, but with a fixed lens angle.
@tripod

bool

1 enables tripod mode, in which the camera vertical orientation

will be locked pointing upwards. Avoids unintended camera roll.

Multiple cameras can belong to the same graphics context. When rendering, each camera will
render one after the other, compositing their output if blending is enabled. The @viewport
attribute can be used to render the camera to only part of the graphics context.

269

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Rendering with two cameras to two different viewports

Geometry
Special purpose objects
The easiest way to create a geometry is to use the jit.gl.gridshape object. This object generates
geometry for one of several standard 3D shapes. By default, it will also render that shape to the
current graphics context. The jit.gl.gridshape is one of several special purpose objects that generate
procedural geometry, and which can render that geometry in the current context.

Object

Description

jit.gl.gridshape

Generate simple geometric shapes as a grid

jit.gl.plato

Generate platonic solids

jit.gl.nurbs

Generate Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline surfaces

jit.gl.text3d

Generate three dimensisional text

jit.gl.model

Load 3D models

jit.gl.graph

Generate 3D graphs

270

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

jit.gl.sketch

State machine interface

jit.gl.lua

State machine interface using Lua programming

Half-edge geometry objects
The jit.geom family of objects, like jit.geom.shape, are a specialized group of Jitter objects
designed to work with Half-edge Geometry Structures. See the Jitter Geometry guide for more
information.

Using @matrixoutput with jit.gl.gridshape
If you enable the @matrixoutput of jit.gl.gridshape, then the object will no longer render its shape
to the current context. Instead, the procedurally generated geometry will come out of the first
outlet as a matrix. The output is a Jitter matrix with multiple planes describing the geometry. The
dimension of the output is equivalent to the number of points in the mesh.

Planes

Type

Description

0-2

vec3

Vertex position (using tri_grid order)

3-4

vec2

Texture coordinates

5-7

vec3

Normal vector

8-11

vec4

Color (rgba)

To render geometry as generated with a jit.gl.gridshape object, use the jit.gl.mesh object. By default
the mesh uses a totally flat shader for rendering, so the 3D geometry from jit.gl.gridshape will
appear as a flat 2D shape.

271

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Rendering the matrix output of {jit.gl.gridshape} using a {jit.gl.mesh} object.

Custom geometry
In addition to using jit.gl.gridshape to generate a simple geometry from a standard list of shapes,
you can also supply your own Jitter matrices to jit.gl.mesh. You can use whatever Jitter processing
technique you like to generate these matrices, but one really convenient way would be to use
jit.gen. This object lets you manipulate Jitter matrices on a cell-by-cell level, which will be familiar to
anyone who has worked with geometry shaders before.

Processing geometry on the GPU with vertex shaders
The jit.gl.gridshape and other special purpose procedural geometry objects, including jit.gen, run
entirely on the CPU. Because of this, they can be slow for very large, complex, dynamic geometries.
For more sophisticated geometry processing, using vertex shaders, use the jit.gl.tf object. When
used in conjunction with jit.gl.buffer and jit.gl.mesh objects, along with a vertex shader held in
jit.gl.shader, the jit.gl.tf object can do complex geometry processing on the GPU, with feedback.

272

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Close up on the {jit.gl.tf} object, in conjuction with other objects needed for transform feedback

Materials
To determine the final appearance of a 3D object, a graphics program will combine information
about the object's shape with information that describes the surface of the object and how it
interacts with light. This information is called the object's material. You can define the material for
an object by connecting a jit.gl.material object to the target object, or by setting the @material
attribute on that object.

jit.gl.material
The simplest object for working with material is jit.gl.material. This object uses a simple lighting
model that assumes that the apparent color of an object is the sum of contributions from ambient,
diffuse, and specular light.

273

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Close up on the {jit.gl.tf} object, in conjuction with other objects needed for transform feedback

In addition to diffuse, ambient, and specular textures, the jit.gl.material object also has inputs for a
custom normal map, height map, and environment map. When using a custom height map, the
@heightmap_mode attribute gives access to two different ways of handling the height map. With
@heightmap_mode parallax , the material will use parallax mapping to manipulate the texture

map for a more realistic look. By contrast, @heightmap_mode vtf will manipulate the object's
geometry, changing its silhouette and recalculating its surface normals.

jit.gl.pbr
The jit.gl.pbr object implements a more realistic material model for 3D objects (the "pbr" stands for
"physically based rendering"). Unlike jit.gl.material, the pbr model uses the metalness and
roughness of an object to determine how it reflects light.

274

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

jit.gl.pbr with more realistic lighting

Similar to jit.gl.material, the jit.gl.pbr object can take a height map as input. The height map can be
used for parallax mapping, and for recomputing surface normals. The jit.gl.pbr object can also
automatically generate texture coordinates based on the geometry of the attached mesh.

On the left, automatically generated texture coordinates with {jit.gl.pbr}. On the right, default texture coordinates
with {jit.gl.material}

275

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

When using an environment map with jit.gl.pbr, the material can take specular highlights from the
environment, greatly adding to the sense of physicality.

Lights
You can add lights to a graphics context with the jit.gl.light object. Through the @type
attribute, this object supports four different standard types of lights.

Type

Description

point

Light emitted from a single point in all directions. Similar to the light from a
lightbulb.

directional

Light emitted as parallel rays from a distant source. Similar to light from the sun.

spot

Light emitted from a point in th eshape of a cone.

hemisphere

Light from two hemispheres. The @diffuse attribute defines the color of one
hemisphere, and the @ambient attribute defines the color of the other
hemisphere.

Instancing
When rendering the same object multiple times, as when rendering snow or smoke or a flock of
birds, we can gain efficiency through instancing. The idea is, we try to keep as much data as
possible on the GPU (where the drawing happens), because copying data from the CPU (where we
work in Max) is computationally expensive.

The first way to do instancing is with jit.gl.multiple. To multiply an object with jit.gl.multiple, connect
to the object that should be instanced.

276

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

The jit.gl.multiple object takes a matrix at each input. The number of cells in the matrix determines
the number of instances to create, and the data contained at each cell maps to a different
parameter. This example uses simple parameters like position and scale, but it's also possible to map
a different material to each instance.

The second is with jit.gl.buffer. This object manages a named reference to a buffer of data stored on
the GPU. It's analogous to jit.gl.multiple, except the data managed by jit.gl.buffer never leaves the
GPU, and can be manipulated with a shader program managed by jit.gl.tf. For particle effects and
simulations involving a very large number of agents that update according to simple rules as defined
in a vertex shader, the objects jit.gl.buffer, jit.gl.tf, and jit.gl.mesh are the best choice.

277

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Strange attractor particle simulation using 1,000,000 points, using jit.gl.buffer and jit.gl.tf

Depth Buffer
Objects rendered in Jitter write to the depth buffer by default, which the renderer will use to draw
objects on top of each other in the expected way. The attributes @depth_write , @depth_clear ,
and @depth_enable can be used to configure how an object interacts with the depth buffer—
whether it writes to, clears, or uses the depth buffer at all. For an in-depth discussion of depth
testing and layering, see the Depth Testing and Layering guide page.

You can retrieve the depth buffer using a jit.gl.pass object. A custom render pass can get a source
from NORMALS , which includes both the surface normals as well as the depth for each fragment.
See Render Passes for more details.

Handles
The jit.gl.handle object an bind to another Jitter object, mouse interaction with a Jitter graphics
context to matrix transformations. In othre words, attach a jit.gl.handle to an object like
jit.gl.gridshape if you want to click and drag on your graphics context to to rotate, scale, and move
that object.

278

User Guide / Jitter / Graphics Processing

Use jit.gl.handle to manipulate the transforms of objects in your scene

Models
Load models into your scene with the jit.gl.model object. This object can load most common model
formats, like OBJ, Collada, and Blender. Check out the jit.gl.model help file for details on how to
work with rigged models, how to fetch materials descriptions from the model, and how to read and
play animations.

279

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

Jitter expr
Inputs

281

Functions and Operators
Matrix Operators

282
286

Basis Function Generators
Constants

287
289

This document describes the Jitter expression language syntax. This is the language used for the
jit.expr object, as well as the exprfill message to a jit.matrix objects. This expression will be
evaluated once for each cell in the input, in order to generate an output matrix with the same
matrix dimensions as the input.

You could make a jit.expr that passes through input unchanged.

jit.expr @expr in[0]

Or you could use an expression to add the first and second inputs together:

jit.expr @expr in[0] + in[1]

Or do something more sophisticated, like apply a vignette mask:

jit.expr @expr (1-hypot(snorm[0],snorm[1]))*in[0]*2.

280

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

Inputs
Reference the inputs to the expr object with in . Get the first input with in[0] , the second with
in[1] , and so on. Use p to get a specific plane of the input, where in[0].p[0] accesses the

first plane of the first input, in[0].p[1] gets the second plane of the first input, and so on.

The jit.expr object defaults to two inputs, but you can increase the number of inputs
with the @inputs attribute.

To get the cell coordinates, use either cell , norm , or snorm . The index is used to select the
dimension, so cell[0] is the cell coordinate in the x direction (first dimension), cell[1] is the
cell coordinate in the y direction, and so on. You can also use dim to get the dimensions of the
matrix in any direction.

Finally, it's also possible to access any named matrix by simply using the name of that matrix instead
of in . With a matrix named my_matrix , use my_matrix to access the contents of that matrix at
the current cell coordinates, or my_matrix.p[0] to access the first plane of that matrix.

Name

Description

in[0-31]

Input matrix cell contents, corresponding plane

in[0-31].p[0-31]

Input matrix cell contents, specific plane

cell[0-31]

Cell coordinates of the current cell

norm[0-31]

Normalized (0 to 1) cell coordinates

snorm[0-31]

Signed normalized (-1 to 1) cell coordinates

dim[0-31]

Matrix dimension size

matrixname[0-31]

Named matrix cell contents, corresponding plane

281

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

matrixname[0-31].p[0-31]

Named matrix cell contents, specific plane

Functions and Operators
Within a Jitter expression, Jitter operators can be applied as functions. For the most part, these are
the same operators as are defined for the jit.op object. Some of these can be applied as infix
operators, for example in[0] + in[1] for the + operator. Others are called as functions, with
commas between arguments, like absdiff(in[0], in[1]) .

Instead of the Jitter operators >p and <p , use the function calls gtp(val, test)
and ltp(val, test) .

Arithmetic
Name

Description

pass

pass left input, no operator

*

multiplication (also mult )

/

division (also div )

+

addition (also add )

-

subtraction (also sub )

+m

addition modulo (char only) (also addm )

-m

subtraction modulo (char only) (also subm )

%

modulo (also mod )

min

minimum

max

maximum

282

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

abs

absolute value (unary)

avg

average

absdiff

absolute value of difference

fold

folding/mirrored modulo (float only)

wrap

wrapping/positive modulo (float only)

!pass

pass right input, no operator

!/

right input divided by left input (flipped)

!-

right input minus left input (flipped)

!%

right input modulo left input (flipped)

ignore

leave previous output value

Trigonometric

(float32/float64 only, unary except atan2)

Name

Description

sin

sine

cos

cosine

tan

tangent

asin

arcsine

acos

arccosine

atan

arctangent

atan2

arctangent (binary)

283

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

sinh

hyperbolic sine

cosh

hyperbolic cosine

tanh

hyperbolic tangent

asinh

hyperbolic arcsine

acosh

hyperbolic arccosine

atanh

hyperbolic arctangent

Bitwise

(long/char only)

Name

Description

&

bitwise and

|

bitwise or

^

bitwise xor

~

bitwise compliment (unary)

>>

right shift

<<

left shift

Logical
Name

Description

&&

logical and

||

logical or

284

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

!

logical not (unary)

>

greater than

<

less than

>=

greater than or equal to

<=

less than or equal to

==

equal

!=

not equal

>p

greater than (pass)

<p

less than (pass)

>=p

greater than or equal to (pass)

<=p

less than or equal to (pass)

==p

equal (pass)

!=p

not equal (pass)

Exponential/Logarithmic/Other

(float32/float64 only, unary except hypot and pow)

Name

Description

exp

e to the x

exp2

2 to the x

ln

log base e

log2

log base 2

285

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

log10

log base 10

hypot

hypotenuse (binary)

pow

x to the y (binary)

sqrt

square root

ceil

integer ceiling

floor

integer floor

round

round to nearest integer

trunc

truncate to integer

Matrix Operators
Many Jitter Matrix Operators can be used inside of a Jitter expression as well. These are the
functional equivalent of Jitter objects like jit.clip , objects that perform a simple operation on
their matrix inputs. There is no exhaustive list of these, but if there's a simple Jitter object that you'd
like to use in an expression, chances are it will work. You could use the following expression to
convolve two matrices.

jit.expr @expr "jit.convolve(in[0], in[1])"

If the Jitter matrix operator can be configured with attributes, those can be supplied as an attribute
list following the other arguments to the matrix operator. The following would constrain the values
in each plane to be between 0.2 and 0.8.

jit.expr @expr "jit.clip(in[0], @min 0.2 @max 0.8)"

286

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

Basis Function Generators
The basis function generators from the jit.bfg object can also be used inside of an expression. These
work in much the same way as matrix operators.

jit.expr @expr "noise.gradient(norm[0]*2, norm[1]*2, @seed 313)"

Distance functions
Name

Description

distance.chebychev

Absolute maximum difference between two points

distance.euclidean

True straight line distance in Euclidean space

distance.euclidean.squared

Squared Euclidean distance

distance.manhattan

Rectilinear distance measured along axes at right angles

distance.manhattan.radial

Manhattan distance with radius fall-off control

distance.minkovsky

Exponentially controlled distance

Filter functions
Name

Description

filter.box

Sums all samples in the filter area with equal weight

filter.gaussian

Weights samples in the filter area using a bell curve

filter.lanczossinc

Weights samples using a steep windowed sinc curve

filter.mitchell

Weights samples using a controllable cubic polynomial

filter.disk

Sums all samples inside the filter's radius with equal weight

filter.sinc

Weights samples using an un-windowed sinc curve

287

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

filter.catmullrom

Weights samples using a Catmull-Rom cubic polynomial

filter.bessel

Weights samples with a linear phase response

filter.triangle

Weights samples in the filter area using a pyramid

Transfer functions
Name

Descrpition

transfer.step

Always 0 if value is less than threshold, otherwise always 1

transfer.smoothstep

Step function with cubic smoothing at boundaries

transfer.bias

Polynomial similar to gamma but remapped to unit interval

transfer.cubic

Generic 3rd order polynomial with controllable coefficients

transfer.saw

Periodic triangle pulse train

transfer.quintic

Generic 5th order polynomial with controllable coefficients

transfer.gain

S-Shaped polynomial evaluated inside unit interval

transfer.pulse

Periodic step function

transfer.smoothpulse

Periodic step function with cubic smoothing at boundaries

transfer.sine

Periodic sinusoidal curve

transfer.linear

Linear function across unit interval

transfer.solarize

Scales given value if threshold is exceeded

Noise functions
Name

Description

noise.cellnoise

Coherent blocky noise

noise.checker

Periodic checker squares

noise.value.cubicspline

Polynomial smoothed pseudo-random values

288

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

noise.value.convolution

Convolution filtered pseudo-random values

noise.sparse.convolution

Convolution filtered pseudo-random feature points

noise.gradient

Directionally weighted polynomially interpolated values

noise.simplex

Simplex weighted pseudo-random values

noise.voronoi

Distance weighted pseudo-random feature points

noise.distorted

Domain distorted combinational noise

Fractal functions
Name

Description

mono

Additive fractal with global simularity across scales

multi

Multiplicative fractal with varying simularity across scales

multi.hybrid

A hybrid additive and multiplicative fractal

multi.hetero

Heterogenous multiplicative fractal

multi.ridged

Multiplicative fractal with sharp ridges

turbulence

Additive mono-fractal with sharp ridges

Constants
There's also a handful of constants ready as well. An expression like in[0] * DEGTORAD would
convert a matrix full of degrees to a matrix full of radians.

Name

Description

PI

Ratio of a circle's circumference to its diameter

TWOPI

Twice the value of pi

HALFPI

Half the value of pi

289

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter expr

INVPI

One over pi

DEGTORAD

Scale factor to convert degrees to radians

RADTODEG

Scale factor to convert radians to degrees

E

Base of the natural logarithm

LN2

Natural logarithm evaluated for 2

LN10

Natural logarithm evaluated for 10

LOG10E

Log base 10 evaluated for e

LOG2E

Log base 2 evaluated for e

SQRT2

Square root of 2

SQRT1_2

One over the square root of 2

290

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

The JXS File Format
The jittershader Tag
The description tag

293
293

The texture tag
Parameters and the param tag

293
294

Shaders and the language tag

304

Jitter objects that work with shaders use a special shader description file format called JXS, or Jitter
XML Shader. This file tells Max how to load a list of shaders and connect them up to Max. It includes
a description, a list of textures and parameters, and a list of shaders. There must always be one
vertex and fragment shader, and there can be an optional geometry shader. A typical JXS file looks
like this:

291

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

<jittershader name="myshader">
<!-- optional description -->
<description>This is my shader</description>
<!-- optional list of texture objects to bind -->
<texture file="chilis.jpg" rectangle="0"/>
<!-- optional list of shader parameters -->
<param name="myparam" type="vec3" default="1 2 3" >
<description>This is my parameter</description>
</param>
<!-- optional list of shader state parameters -->
<param name="modelViewProjectionMatrix" type="mat4"
state="MODELVIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX" />
<param name="jit_position" type="vec3" state="POSITION" />
<param name="jit_texcoord" type="vec2" state="TEXCOORD" />
<!-- optionally include other glsl sources -->
<include source="diffuse.glsl" program="vp" />
<!-- list of language implementations -->
<language name="glsl" version="1.5">
<!-- list of binding targets for shader parameters -->
<bind param="modelViewProjectionMatrix" program="vp" />
<bind param="jit_position" program="vp" />
<bind param="jit_texcoord" program="vp" />
<bind param="myparam" program="fp" />
<program name="vp" type="vertex">
<![CDATA[
#version 330 core
in vec3 jit_position;
in vec2 jit_texcoord;
out jit_PerVertex {
vec2 texcoord0;
} jit_out;
uniform mat4 modelViewProjectionMatrix;
void main() {

292

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

jit_out.texcoord0 = jit_texcoord;
}
]]>
</program>
<program name="fp" type="fragment">
<![CDATA[
#version 330 core
in jit_PerVertex {
vec2 texcoord0;
} jit_in;
layout (location = 0) out vec4 outColor;
uniform sampler2D tex0;
uniform vec3 myparam;
void main() {
outColor = vec4(myparam, 1) * texture(tex0, jit_in.texcoord0);
}
]]>
</program>
</language>
</jittershader>

The jittershader Tag
A JXS file opens with a jittershader tag. This tag has a single, optional attribute, the name
attribute. This attribute is currently unused by Max, but by convention a JXS author should provide
a descriptive name.

The description tag
A jittershader may include a description . This description is also optional, but by convention
this is a good place to document the intended behavior of a JXS file. Max may use this information
when listing available shaders.

The texture tag

293

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

A jittershader may have one or more textures, defined using a texture tag. The file
attribute loads the texture from an image file, which may be any file in Max's Search Path.

<texture file="mytexture.jpg"/>

A texture may be modified, using any attribute of the jit.gl.texture object.

<texture file="gn.gradperm.png" rectangle="0" filter="none none"
wrap="repeat repeat" mipmap="none" anisotropy="0" />

Bind a texture to a parameter using the unit attribute. This defaults to zero, and so may be
omitted if there is only one texture parameter.

<!-- The texture has unit="1", so binds to texture tex_rand with
default="1" -->
<param name="tex_normals" type="int" default="0" />
<param name="tex_rand" type="int" default="1" />
<texture file="random-tex.png" type="float16" unit="1" rectangle="0"
filter="none none" wrap="repeat repeat"/>

See texture parameters for more details about binding Max textures to shader programs.

Parameters and the param tag
Use the param tag to create parameters, which define bindings between values available in Max
and shader variables. These can bind to numerical Max values, to Jitter textures, or to specific state
variables calculated by the graphics engine. A parameter may contain a description.

294

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

<jittershader>
<param name="myparam" type="float" default="1.0">
<description> A parameter description </description>
</param>
</jittershader>

A parameter must also have a type. Parameter types can be most of the primitive types defined by
the glsl standard.

Type

Description

bool

boolean type

int

integer type, also used for texture input

float

float-width number type

double

double-width number type

bvec2, bvec3, bvec4

boolean vector of length 2, 3, or 4

ivec2, ivec3, ivec4

integer vector of length 2, 3, or 4

vec2, vec3, vec4

float vector of length 2, 3, or 4

dvec2, dvec3, dvec4

double vector of length 2, 3, or 4

mat2

two-by-two matrix

mat3

three-by-three matrix

mat4

four-by-four matrix

Numeric parameters
Create a binding to a numerical value in Max by creating a param tag without a state attribute.

295

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

<jittershader>
<param name="myparam" type="float" default="1.0" />
</jittershader>

Set this value in Max using the param message.

Set a numeric parameter with a Max message.

Texture parameters
To define a texture parameter, a param should have the type "int" and a default value that matches
the parameter index. Max will recognize that this "int" param represents a texture if the param is
later bound to a sampler type, for example a sampler2DRect or a sampler2D.

296

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

<jittershader>
<!-- Two input textures -->
<param name="image1" type="int" default="0" />
<param name="image2" type="int" default="1" />
<param name="modelViewProjectionMatrix" type="mat4"
state="MODELVIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX" />
<param name="textureMatrix0" type="mat4" state="TEXTURE0_MATRIX" />
<param name="textureMatrix1" type="mat4" state="TEXTURE1_MATRIX" />
<param name="jit_position" type="vec3" state="POSITION" />
<param name="jit_texcoord" type="vec2" state="TEXCOORD" />
<language name="glsl" version="1.5">
<bind param="image1" program="fp" />
<bind param="image2" program="fp" />
<bind param="modelViewProjectionMatrix" program="vp" />
<bind param="textureMatrix0" program="vp" />
<bind param="textureMatrix1" program="vp" />
<bind param="jit_position" program="vp" />
<bind param="jit_texcoord" program="vp" />
<program name="vp" type="vertex">
<![CDATA[
#version 330 core
in vec3 jit_position;
in vec2 jit_texcoord;
out jit_PerVertex {
vec2 texcoord0;
vec2 texcoord1;
} jit_out;
uniform mat4 modelViewProjectionMatrix;
uniform mat4 textureMatrix0;
uniform mat4 textureMatrix1;
void main() {
gl_Position = modelViewProjectionMatrix*vec4(jit_position, 1.);
jit_out.texcoord0 = vec2(textureMatrix0 * vec4(jit_texcoord, 0.,
1.));
jit_out.texcoord1 = vec2(textureMatrix1 * vec4(jit_texcoord, 0.,
1.));
}
]]>
</program>

297

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

<![CDATA[
#version 330 core
// texcoords
in jit_PerVertex {
vec2 texcoord0;
vec2 texcoord1;
} jit_in;
layout (location = 0) out vec4 outColor;
// samplers
uniform sampler2DRect image1;
uniform sampler2DRect image2;
void main() {
vec4 im1 = texture(image1, jit_in.texcoord0);
vec4 im2 = texture(image2, jit_in.texcoord1);
outColor = im1 + im2;
}
]]>
</program>
</language>
</jittershader>

In Max, you can set these textures using a texture list, or using the inlets of a jit.gl.slab object.

298

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

Setting the texture inputs of a shader

State parameters
Parameters can also bind to shader state variables, built-in uniform variables that expose the
graphics engine state to JXS shader programs. To create a param bound to a state variable in this
way, use the state attribute.

<param name="itvmat" type="mat3" state="NORMAL_MATRIX" />

Available shader parameter state bindings are listed below.

Model View and Projection Matrices

WORLD_MATRIX

mat4

transforms into world coordinates, also known as model
matrix

VIEW_MATRIX

mat4

transforms into current camera view, also known as eye

MODELVIEW_MATRIX

mat4

combined view and model (world) transform

299

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

PROJECTION_MATRIX

mat4

current camera projection transform

VIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX

mat4

combined projection and view
transform

PREV_VIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX

mat4

previous frame
VIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX

MODELVIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX

mat4

combined projection view and model
transform

PREV_MODELVIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX

mat4

previous frame
MODELVIEW_PROJECTION_MATRIX

NORMAL_MATRIX

mat3

orients the normals in eye space

CAM_PROJECTION_MATRIX

mat4

provides the current rendering camera's
projection matrix; in most cases is
equivalent to PROJECTION_MATRIX
except in cases where a full-screen
quad is rendering, e.g. in a jit.gl.slab/pix
(or jit.gl.pass).

Camera

CAMERA_POSITION

vec3

camera position in world space

CAMERA_DIRECTION

vec3

camera direction in world space

VIEWPORT

vec2

the pixel size of rendering window

INVERSE_VIEWPORT

vec2

the inverse of the viewport dims

NEAR_CLIP

float

camera near clipping distance

FAR_CLIP

float

camera far clipping distance

FAR_CORNER

vec3

far corner of the view frustrum

Light

300

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

Shaders used in Jitter can reference up to eight simultaneous lights. To create a param bound to
the state of a particular light, use a state attribute with a value like LIGHT0_POSITION to bind to
the position of the first light, LIGHT1_POSITION to bind to the position of the second light, and so
on.

LIGHT_VIEWPROJ_MATRIX0-

mat4

scene seen from the light position

LIGHT_RANGE0-7

float

distance reached by the light

LIGHT0-7_POSITION

vec3

position of the light

LIGHT0-7_DIRECTION

vec3

direction of the light

LIGHT0-7_AMBIENT

vec4

ambient light color

LIGHT0-7_DIFFUSE

vec4

diffuse light color

LIGHT0-7_SPECULAR

vec4

specular light color

LIGHT0-7_CUTOFF

float

the spotlight cutoff in degrees

LIGHT0-7_EXPONENT

float

the spotlight exponent defining dropoff from cone

7

center

Material

AMBIENT

vec4

material ambient color

DIFFUSE

vec4

material diffuse color

SPECULAR

vec4

material specular color

EMISSION

vec4

material emission color

COLOR0

vec4

object color

Texture

301

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

Similar to lights, Jitter shaders can reference up to eight texture inputs. For each one, create a
param bound to the state of a particular texture with an indexed key for state . So
TEXTURE0_MATRIX will bind to the texture transform matrix of the first texture,
TEXTURE1_MATRIX to bind the texture transform matrix of the second texture, and so on.

TEXTURE0-7_MATRIX

mat4

Texture tranform matrix for textures 0-7

TEXDIM0-7

vec2

Texture dimentions for textures 0-7

Time
Jitter provides time, frame and date based state parameters, useful for tasks like animating values
and seeding random number generators in your shader program. TIME and FRAME will be specific
to a particular shader program, whereas GLOBAL_TIME , DELTA_TIME , CONTEXT_FRAME , and DATE
will be uniform for all shader programs running in a particular context.

TIME

float

time in seconds since program compilation

GLOBAL_TIME

float

time in seconds since context initialization

DELTA_TIME

float

time in seconds since previous frame

FRAME

int

frame count since program compilation

CONTEXT_FRAME

int

frame count since context initialization

DATE

vec4

year, month, day, time in seconds

Matrix transformations
You can apply a matrix transformation to any param with a mat4 type , using the transform
attribute.

<param name="itvmat" type="mat4" state="VIEW_MATRIX"
transform="INVERSE_TRANSPOSE" />

302

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

Recognized matrix transformations include IDENTITY , TRANSPOSE , INVERSE and
INVERSE_TRANSPOSE .

Vertex attributes
Several built-in vertex attributes are available via the following state tags:

POSITION

vec3

TEXCOORD

vec2

NORMAL

vec3

TANGENT

vec3

BITANGENT

vec3

COLOR

vec4

VERTEX_ATTR

user-defined

VERTEX_ATTR0

user-defined

VERTEX_ATTR1

user-defined

VERTEX_ATTR2

user-defined

VERTEX_ATTR3

user-defined

The state tags VERTEX_ATTR and VERTEX_ATTR0 through VERTEX_ATTR4 are for custom vertex
attributes. Define the param tag like so:

<param name="pvel" type="vec4" state="VERTEX_ATTR" />

and in the vertex program:

303

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

in vec4 pvel;

To set the values of custom vertex attributes from the patcher, send jit.gl.mesh the
vertex_attr_matrix message followed by the name of a jit.matrix containing the attribute values.
The example patcher custom.vertex.attribute demonstrates this.

Shaders and the language tag
After the description, textures, and parameters are declared, the language tag includes the shader
definitions themselves.

<!-- list of language implementations -->
<language type="glsl" version="1.0">
<!-- list of binding targets for shader parameters -->
<bind param="myparam" program="vp"/>
<!-- vertex and fragment programs -->
<program name="vp" type="vertex" source="sh.passthru.xform.vp.glsl"/>
<program name="fp" type="fragment">
<![CDATA[
// entry point
void main()
{
gl_FragColor=vec4(0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1.0);
}
]]>
</program>
</language>

The language tag includes the type , which will always be "glsl", as well as the version . Shader
versions 1.5 or higher are treated as "modern" shaders, whereas anything lower will be treated as
legacy and transformed automatically before getting passed to the graphics engine.

304

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

The bind tag
The bind tag binds declared parameters to variables in any one of the shader programs.

<jittershader>
<param name="myparam1" type="vec3" default="3.0 4.0 5.0" />
<param name="myparam2" type="float" default="0" />
<language type="glsl" version="1.5">
<bind param="myparam1" program="vp" />
<bind param="myparam2" program="fp" />
<program name="vp" type="vertex">
<![CDATA[
uniform vec3 myparam1;
void main() {
// ... the vertex program
}
]]>
</program>
<program name="fp" type="fragment">
<![CDATA[
uniform float myparam2;
void main() {
// ... the fragment program
}
]]>
</program>
</langauge>
</jittershader>

The param attribute of a bind tag identifies a parameter with that name. The program attribute
directs that parameter to a particular program. Within the program, the parameter is bound to the
variable with the same name.

305

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

The type of the param tag should match the type of the variable in the vertex, fragment, or
geometry shader program. One exception is for texture parameters. The type of the param for a
texture parameter should be int , and it should be bound to a variable with a "Sampler" type, like
Sampler2D or Sampler2DRect .

The include tag
After binding parameters but before declaring shaders, you can use the include tag to include
external glsl sources. These can be any files in the Max search path.

<bind param="FrontMaterialParameters" program="vp" />
<bind param="LightingParameters" program="vp" />
<include source="diffuse.glsl" program="vp" />
<include source="specular.glsl" program="vp" />
<program name="vp" type="vertex">

The program tag
A program tag contains the actual shader program. The name of a program tag can be anything,
and is used by the bind tag to bind external parameters to program variables. The type attribute
of a program tag can be vertex , fragment , or geometry . To define the shader program itself, a
program can use the source attribute to specify a .glsl file, or the contents of the program tag
can be character data containing the glsl shader program itself.

306

User Guide / Jitter / The JXS File Format

<language type="glsl" version="1.0">
<program name="vp" type="vertex" source="sh.passthru.xform.vp.glsl"/>
<program name="fp" type="fragment">
<![CDATA[
void main()
{
gl_FragColor=vec4(0.5, 0.5, 0.5, 1.0);
}
]]>
</program>
</language>

307

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Jitter Matrix
Quick Reference
Matrix processing

309
309

Creating a Matrix
Coordinates
Frames, Colors, ARGB

309
312
313

Data Types
Getting and Setting Values

313
314

Adapting and Interpolating
Inspecting Matrices

316
318

Splitting and Recombining Matrices
Coercing

321
329

A Matrix holds multidimensional, numeric data. Each matrix has one or more dimensions, in
addition to one or more planes. You can think of a matrix as a grid, where each cell of the grid holds
a list of numbers. The length of the list in each cell is the number of planes.

A three-by-three matrix. You can see that, since this is a three-plane matrix, each cell contains three values as well.

308

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

When a matrix holds an image or a frame of video data, it's equivalent to a two-dimensional array,
where each cell represents one pixel. The dimension of the matrix would correspond to the
resolution of the image or frame, and there would be one plane for each channel of color data
(typically red, green and blue), possibly with one additional channel for alpha. Every cell of a matrix
must have the same data type, with the possible types being char , long , float32 , and
float64 .

Quick Reference
Operation

Objects

Create a matrix

jit.matrix

Display a matrix

jit.window, jit.pwindow

Getting and setting values

jit.fill, jit.spill, jit.iter

Viewing matrix data

jit.cellblock, jit.print

Getting matrix descriptors

jit.matrixinfo, jit.fpsgui, getattr

Splitting and combining matrices

jit.pack, jit.unpack, jit.submatrix, jit.concat, jit.dimmap

Re-interpreting matrix data

jit.coerce

Matrix processing
Matrix processing will always happen on the CPU, which has advantages and disadvantages. In
general, graphics processing can happen on the CPU (Central Processing Unit) or the GPU (Graphics
Processing Unit). CPU processing is sequential and generally slower, but can support certain
operations that GPU processing cannot. GPU processing is highly parallel and often much faster,
but can be more restricted. For video and graphics programming, Max has objects and data
structures supporting both kinds of processing. For GPU-based processing, use the jit.gl.* and
jit.fx.* families of objects, which make use of textures instead of matrices.

Creating a Matrix

309

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Create an empty matrix by creating a jit.matrix object. The object arguments determine its plane
count, data type, and dimension size.

Named matrices
Like other named storage types, each matrix has a unique name. Objects that send matrices to each
other send messages like jit_matrix u12345678 , where u12345678 is the name of the matrix.
Since you can refer to matrices by name, It's possible to define a matrix in one part of your patcher
and use it in another.

The matrix named my_matrix is defined in one part of the patcher, but is referred to by name and used in another
part of the patcher.

Loading from a video or image

310

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

You can fill a matrix with the contents of a video or image file with the importmovie message. If
you're loading a video file, you can supply a time offset to load a particular frame. The jit.matrix
object can only load a single image frame this way. To work with videos, use jit.movie, jit.playlist, or
jit.matrixset.

Patcher cords
Objects that send out a Jitter matrix will style their outgoing patch cord with black and green
stripes. This is only cosmetic, as these just carry regular Max messages of the form
jit_matrix u12345678 . However, the special styling helps to distinguish matrix patch cords from
other patch cords.

311

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Even though they have special styling, patch cords carrying Jitter matrices are just carrying regular Max lists. You
can work with them in the same way as any other Max message.

Coordinates
Jitter matrixes index from the top left, meaning the origin <0, 0> is in the top left corner. If the
matrix is 101 cells wide, then <50, 50> is in the center, <100, 0> is the top right, and <0, 100>
is the bottom left.

312

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Frames, Colors, ARGB
Matrices can hold arbitrary data, but Jitter objects that operate on image frames will interpret each
plane as corresponding to a particular color. Most Jitter objects work in ARGB format, expecting the
first plane of a matrix to represent alpha, the second the red color value, the third green, and the
final plane blue. If the type of the matrix is char or long , then the maximum value of a cell, when
interpreted as a color, is 255. For float32 or float64 types, the maximum value for a particular
color chanel is 1.0.

Value

Type

Color

255 255 255

char

White

1.0 1.0 1.0

float32

White

255 0 0

char

Red

1.0 0 0

float32

Red

128 128 128

char

Medium gray

0.5 0.5 0.5

float32

Medium gray

When viewing a three plane matrix in a jit.window or a jit.pwindow, Jitter will assume
RGB format instead. You can change the color display mode of a jit.pwindow or a
jit.window by setting the @colormode attribute

Data Types
Jitter matrices support four data types:

313

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Type

Description

char

unsigned 8-bit integer (0 to 255)

long

signed 32-bit integer

float32

32-bit floating point number

float64

64-bit floating point number

There aren't very many use cases for a long matrix. One of the few is when working
with jit.repos, which would let you specify more than 255 pixel offsets.

Getting and Setting Values
Fetch values from a matrix with the getcell message. For example, the message getcell 9 19
would retrieve the value in the 10th column (since we're indexing from zero) and the 20th row. The
jit.matrix object will send the contents of the cell as a list out of its right outlet. The length of the
list will be the plane count of the matrix.

For setting the values of a matrix, the most common ways are with the setcell , setall , and
exprfill messages. The setcell message simply sets the value of one cell to a given value. The

message setcell 1 2 val 255 255 0 255 would set the cell at coordinates <1, 2> to the
value 255 255 0 255 . The setall message fills the whole matrix with a particular value, so the
message setall 0 255 0 255 would set every cell of the matrix to the value 0 255 0 255 .
Finally, the exprfill message lets you fill a matrix parametrically, according to a function that will
be evaluated for each cell of the matrix. For more on the expression language used here, see Jitter
expr.

314

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Helpful objects for getting and setting values
A handful of jitter objects support setting and retrieving values from a matrix using lists. The jit.fill
object lets you "fill" a matrix using a list. Note that jit.fill references a matrix by name, and doesn't
output a matrix itself.

Going in the other direction, jit.spill can output a matrix as a list. The attributes @plane and
@offset determine the plane and offset into the matrix. The @listlength attribute lets you set

the length of the output list.

315

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

One more object that serves a similar function is the object jit.iter. This object will output each each
cell of the input matrix one at a time, along with the coordinates of each cell.

Adapting and Interpolating
If a jit.matrix object receives a matrix as input that does not match the dimensions of the internal
matrix, the object can adapt to or interpolate the incoming data. Interpolating means creating inbetween values to fill in gaps where needed. If a 100 by 100 cell jit.matrix object receives a 10 by

316

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

10 cell input, it can interpolate to fill in the missing values. Interpolation is off by default. Use the
@interp attribute to control interpolation.

When enabled, jit.matrix will smoothly interpolate when asked to scale up an input matrix

By default, the arguments to a jit.matrix object determine the plane count, type, and dimensions of
the internal matrix. If you enable the @adapt attribute, then jit.matrix will change its properties to
match the dimensions of the incoming matrix, including plane count, dimensions, and type. An
empty jit.matrix object with no arguments will have @adapt enabled by default.

317

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

If @adapt is enabled, a jit.matrix will update its dimensions to match an input matrix.

Inspecting Matrices
Viewing as images
The jit.window and jit.pwindow objects will display whatever matrix they receive as an image. So,
jit.pwindow is a great way to monitor a video stream in a running patcher. The jit.window object is
often used as a final render destination, where a series of Jitter processes modify a matrix, and then
a jit.window presents the final result.

318

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

jit.pwindow and jit.window are useful for viewing matrices, and they can also be used to view textures.

Matrix descriptors
Several objects can get information about the dimension, plane count, type, or other descriptors of
a particular matrix. The jit.fpsgui object can be configured to display any of these descriptors, in
addition to the frame rate of a stream of matrices.

The jit.fpsgui object shows useful info about a matrix

319

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

If you want to retrieve these same matrix descriptors as Max messages, for further downstream
processing, use either the jit.matrixinfo object, or use the getattr object to fetch these values as
attributes from a matrix. Both methods are equally efficient and idiomatic, the main difference is
that jit.matrixinfo processes an incoming matrix, while getattr must attach to a jit.matrix object.

The jit.matrixinfo object reports on the descriptors of an incoming matrix. These same descriptors are available as
attributes, so the getattr object can also retrieve them.

Matrix contents
For viewing the contents of a jit.matrix object as numerical data, use the jit.cellblock object. It can
display a one or two dimensional matrix in a "spreadsheet" format. You can choose which plane of
the matrix to view by sending the message plane $1 , where $1 is the plane of the matrix that
you want to display. You can also send the message plane -1 to view all planes of the matrix
simultaneously, with each cell containing a list.

The jit.cellblock object can only display matrices with less than two dimensions. For
larger matrices, first split the matrix with jit.submatrix, pass the matrix through
jit.dimmap to cut out redundant dimensions, then pass the result through a jit.matrix to
copy the matrix reference to a format that jit.cellblock can use. See Splitting by
dimension for more details.

320

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Use the jit.cellblock object to view a matrix as numerical cells

Finally, the jit.print object can print the entire contents of any matrix of any number of dimensions
and planes.

Splitting and Recombining Matrices

321

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

It's possible to split and recombine matrices across planes or across dimensions. Use jit.unpack and
jit.pack to recombine matrices by plane, and use jit.submatrix and jit.concat to recombine by
dimension.

Splitting and remapping planes
By default, the jit.unpack object will split a 4-plane matrix into four single-plane matrices, but you
can pass an argument to split into a different number of single planes.

The default configuration of jit.unpack splits a 4-plane ARGB matrix into four single-plane matrices.

If you want to split a multiple-plane matrix into other multiple-plane matrices, use the @offset
and @jump attributes to configure jit.unpack. Arguments following @offset indicate, for each
outlet, which plane in the input matrix to start reading from. Argments following @jump indicate,
for each outlet, how many planes to read from the input.

322

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Setting

Outlet 1

Outlet 2

Outlet 3

jit.unpack 2
@offset 0 1 @jump 2
2

two-plane matrix, from

two-plane matrix, from

none

planes 0 and 1 of the
input matrix

planes 1 and 2 of the
input matrix

jit.unpack 2
@offset 0 3 @jump 3
1

three-plane matrix, from

one-plane matrix, from

planes 0, 1, and 2 of the
input matrix

plane 3 of the input
matrix

jit.unpack 3

one-plane matrix from
plane 1

one-plane matrix from
plane 2

@offset 1 2 3 @jump
1 1 1

none

one-plane
matrix from
plane 3

With @offset and @jump, you can configure jit.unpack to output multiplane matrices.

The jit.pack object combines input matrices into a single multi-plane matrix. Like jit.unpack, it by
default expects four input matrices, and the first argument determines the number of inlets.

323

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

jit.pack combines mutiple input matrices into a single multi-plane matrix

Using @offset and @jump , you can combine several multi-plane matrices together. The @offset
attribute controls the offset into each input matrix (at each inlet), and the @jump attribute
determines how many planes to pull from each input matrix. The final plane count will the the sum
of all the arguments to @jump .

Setting

Output

jit.pack 2
@offset 0 0
@jump 2 2

four-plane matrix, with two planes from the first inlet and two planes from

jit.pack 2

four-plane matrix, with one plane from the first inlet and two planes from
the second inlet

@offset 0 0
@jump 1 3

the second inlet

jit.pack 2
@offset 0 2

four-plane matrix, with two planes from the first inlet and two from the

@jump 2 2

This would combine the alpha and red channels of the first input with the
green and blue channels of the second.

second inlet. The first two planes of the second input matrix are skipped.

The jit.matrix object can also remap planes directly, without using any other objects. The
@planemap attribute controls the mapping between input and output planes.

324

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Setting

Result

jit.matrix 4
@planemap 0 1 2
3

Map the first plane of the input (at index zero) to the first plane of the

jit.matrix 4
@planemap 0 0 0
0

Map the first plane of the input to each of the four output channels.

jit.matrix 4

Shift input planes over by one, effectively converting ARGB format to

@planemap 1 2 3
0

RGBA format.

output, the second plane of the input to the second plane of the output,
and so on. In other words, leave the input unchanged.

This makes a 4-plane matrix from just the first plane of the input.

Splitting and remapping dimensions
One way to split an input matrix is with the @srcdimstart , @srcdimend , @dstdimstart , and
@dstdimend attributes. When a jit.matrix object receives an input matrix, it will look at these

attributes to determine how the input is copied into the internal matrix. It's important to note that
these attributes will have no effect unless the @usesrcdim and @usedstdim attributes are
enabled.

325

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

The source and destination dimensions can control how the input matrix is mapped to the output. This example
also shows how if the start and end areas are different in size, the input will grow or shrink as it's mapped to the
output.

The jit.submatrix object will let you reference just a portion of the input matrix. The @dim attribute
determines the size of the portion in each dimension, corresponding to width and height for a twodimensional matrix. The @offset attribute adjusts the offset of the portion, which you could also
think of as the x- and y-coordinate of the submatrix.

326

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

The @dim attribute determines the size of the submatrix region.

The @offset attribute can shift the submatrix region.

The output of jit.submatrix will have smaller dimensions than the input, but it will never reduce the
number of dimensions, even a redundant dimension of size 1. The jit.dimmap object can remove
whole dimensions from an input matrix, or insert a redundant dimension. It can also remap and
invert dimensions, making it useful for transposing and reversing a matrix.

327

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

jit.submatrix will never change the number of dimensions, but jit.dimmap can remove and remap dimensions
arbitrarily

Setting

Output

jit.dimmap @map
1 0

Map input dimension 1 to output dimension 0, effectively transposing
the input matrix.

jit.dimmap @map
0 2

Map input dimension 0 to output dimension 0, and input dimension 2 to
output dimension 1. This will remove dimension 1 from the input,
resulting in a two-dimensional output matrix from a three-dimensional
input.

0 -1 1

Insert a redundant, size-one dimension between the first and second
input dimensions.

jit.dimmap @map
0 1 @invert 1 0

Leave the input dimensions mapped normally, but flip the first
dimension, effectively mirroring an input image from left to right.

jit.dimmap @map

To combine or recombine two matrices, use the jit.concat object. The @concatdim attribute will
determine the dimension along which the two matrices will be concatenated. They do not need to
have the same size, although there may be empty space in the resulting concatenated matrix, or
some data might be lost if the edges of the two matrices don't line up.

328

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

Concatenating two matrices. The @concatdim attribute determines the dimension along with the two matrices are
combined.

More ways to split
There are still other matrix manipulation objects that may be helpful when splitting and recombining
matrices:

Object

Description

jit.split

Split a matrix into two

jit.scissors

Cut up a matrix into equal parts

jit.glue

Recombine a matrix from multiple parts

jit.multiplex

Multiplex (interleave) two matrices into one

jit.demultiplex

Demultiplex (deinterleave) one matrix into two

Coercing

329

User Guide / Jitter / Jitter Matrix

The jit.coerce object can be used to change the interpretation of the contents of a matrix, without
copying or changing those contents. For example, you could treat a long matrix as if it were a
float32 matrix, or you could treat a 4-plane char matrix as a 1-plane float32 matrix. This is

similar to a cast operation in many programming languages.

The jit.coerce can change the way the underlying bits of a matrix are interpreted

330

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

Render Passes
Using jit.gl.pass

331

The JXP File Format

332

Rendering means taking the elements of a scene, including the lighting, camera position, and the
geometry of the objects in the scene, and using those to compute an image. After the initial pass,
we can perform additional render passes to create postprocessing effects. These passes can use the
initial image output, along with intermediary structures computed during the previous pass—for
example the depth buffer—to produce another image. Depth of field is a classic example of a
postprocessing effect, using the depth buffer to apply a blur proportional to the distance from the
camera. Multiple passes can be chained together to produce complex effects.

SCENE

INTERMEDIATE

RENDER

Geometry
Depth

Camera

First Render

Flow
Lights

PASSES

Depth of Field
Motion Blur

Final Render

Typical graphics processing rendering pipeline

Using jit.gl.pass
The jit.gl.pass object provides a high-level, text-based way to describe a render pass. Working with
a pass description file (a .jxp file), you can combine Jitter shaders defined in text (.jxs files) with Genbased Jitter shaders (.genjit files) to create a final, complex shader with multiple stages.

331

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

Because a jit.gl.pass object works with intermediate render targets like the depth buffer, it works
differently from objects like jit.gl.slab or jit.gl.pix, which can work as simple video effects. The
jit.gl.pass object always works with a jit.gl.node object, even if it's the internal jit.gl.node object in a
jit.world object.

To work with a jit.gl.pass, geometry must have a material attached to it, for example by
attaching a jit.gl.material or a jit.gl.pbr object.

The typical use pattern for jit.gl.pass is to bind jit.gl.pass to a jit.gl.node object with the same name.
Multiple jit.gl.pass objects can be connected together to create complex effects. Finally, the texture
output of the last jit.gl.pass object is connected to a jit.gl.layer object to be displayed in the root
rendering context.

It's typical to use jit.gl.pass with jit.gl.node and jit.gl.layer.

When a jit.gl.pass object is connected to a jit.gl.node, the @capture attribute is
controlled by the jit.gl.pass object. It will be set automatically to accommodate for the
render targets requested by all jit.gl.pass effects bound to that node.

The JXP File Format

332

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

To determine its behavior, a jit.gl.pass object loads a Jitter Pass file: a specially-formatted XML file
that defines one or more render passes. Every JXP file has a <jitterpass> node as its root.

<jitterpass>
<!-- Pass definitions go here -->
</jitterpass>

Max includes several examples of common post-processing effects, implemented in the
JXP format. Start with motionblur and look for other examples in the same folder.

The <pass> tag
The <jitterpass> tag can contain multiple <pass> tags, each of which defines one pass.

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<!-- Pass definition here -->
</pass>
</jitterpass>

Each <pass> must have a name attribute, which is the identifier that a jit.gl.pass will use with the
@fxname attribute to load the pass definition. For built-in pass definitions, the @fxname attribute

is sufficient to select the pass. To load a custom pass definition, use the @file attribute to load
the custom pass file, followed by @fxname to load the specific pass.

333

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

jit.gl.pass loading a custom JXP file

The <bind> tag
At the top of a <pass> tag, you can can use the <bind> tag to create a binding between Max
attributes and shader parameters. Use the name attribute to define the name of the attribute as it
will appear in Max. The param attribute will specify which shader parameter to bind to. The param
attribute will bind to the first shader parameter among <subpass> tags with a matching name.

The <bind> tag lets you bind shader parameters to Max attributes. A custom attribute will be created for each
<bind> tag.

The <inputs> tag
A <pass> tag can optionally contain an <inputs> tag containing one or more <input> tags
specifying input source properties (see source input). The properties are exposed via jit.gl.texture
attributes on the underlying render targets of the bound jit.gl.node context. A common use case
might be inverting the depth buffer clear value. Render target erase_color defaults to 0 0 0 0.
Since the alpha component determines the depth, this default implies a depth clear value 0. To
invert, specify a 1 for the alpha component of erase_color in the <input> tag for source
NORMALS. The code below demonstrates this, and specifies type and erase_color per target.

334

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<inputs>
<input source="COLOR" type="char" erase_color="0 0 0 1" />
<!-- inverted depth clear value -->
<input source="NORMALS" type="float16" erase_color="0 0 0 1" />
</inputs>
<!-- subpasses -->
</pass>
</jitterpass>

Important to note, input sources are shared by all pass effects bound to a particular jit.gl.node
context. As a concequence any <input> tag attribute defined here will change that attribute for all
active passes in the context.

The <subpass> tag
Each <pass> tag contains one or more <subpass> tags. These <subpass> tags define which
shader program to load, as well as how that shader should connect to the various input sources
available (see subpass sources). To load a shader, set the file attribute to load a Jitter shader (a
.jxs file), or set the gen attribute to load a jit.gl.pix shader (a .genjit file).

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<subpass file="cf.radialblur.jxs">
<!-- subpass inputs -->
</subpass>
<subpass gen="kaleido.genjit">
<!-- subpass inputs -->
</subpass>
</pass>
</jitterpass>

A <subpass> tag can also have a name, allowing it to be referred to as an input by other
subpasses. Finally, a subpass can also use the dimscale attribute to scale the size of any

335

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

dimension of the output texture, and the rect attribute to adjust or invert the subpass texture
coordinates. See the object reference for jit.gl.pix for more.

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<!-- a named subpass can be referred to by other subpasses -->
<subpass file="cf.radialblur.jxs" name="subpass_name">
</subpass>
<!-- here dimscale will downsample (shrink) the output texture -->
<subpass file="cf.radialblur.jxs" dimscale="0.5 0.5">
</subpass>
<!-- rect defines normalized texture coordinates, left-bottom-righttop -->
<!-- used in this way, we could mirror the texture left to right-->
<subpass file="cf.radialblur.jxs" rect="1 0 0 1">
</subpass>
<!-- >
</pass>
</jitterpass>

Subpass sources
The number of texture inputs to a subpass will depend on the number of texture inputs of its
loaded shader. You can connect each input to a different source using the <input> child tag. The
input to a subpass can be a named texture, another named subpass, or one of several special
sources.

Named texture input
Use the name attribute to specify a named texture as input.

336

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<subpass file="cf.radialblur.jxs">
<input name="named_texture" />
</subpass>
</pass>
</jitterpass>

Source input
The source tag can get input from any of several special sources.

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<subpass file="hdr.bloom.jxs">
<input source="VELOCITY" />
</subpass>
</pass>
</jitterpass>

Name

Description

COLOR

RGBA color render target

NORMALS

normals in RBG, depth buffer in A

VELOCITY

horizontal velocity in R, vertical velocity in G

PREVIOUS

the preceeding subpass output

HISTORY

the previous output (output from the previous frame) of the entire <pass>

TEXTURE0...N

any of the textures, input as a list, to jit.gl.pass. If three texture names are
bound to the @texture attribute of jit.gl.pass, refer to the first one with
TEXTURE0, the second with TEXTURE1, and the third with TEXTURE2.

337

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

SUBPASS0...N

any subpass output of the current <pass> . The first <subpass> is
SUBPASS0, the second is SUBPASS1, and so on.

ALBEDO

the albedo material component (non-jit.gl.pbr materials use diffuse).

ROUGHMETAL

material roughness in R and metalness G (non-jit.gl.pbr materials use
inverted shininess in R and shininess in G).

ENVIRONMENT

the environment cubemap texture of the active jit.gl.environment.
Specifying will disable environment input on bound materials.

Pass effects that request NORMALS, VELOCITY, ALBEDO, ROUGHMETAL, or
ENVIRONMENT as input sources require jit.gl.material or jit.gl.pbr generated materials.

Subpass input
Use the subpass attribute to specify another subpass to use as input.

<jitterpass>
<pass name="passname">
<subpass file="cf.laplace.jxs" name="laplace">
<input source="COLOR" />
</subpass>
<subpass file="hdr.bloom.jxs">
<input subpass="laplace" />
</subpass>
</pass>
</jitterpass>

The output index of a multi-output subpass input type is specified using an "output" attribute and
0-based indexing. The previous frame of subpass input types can be requested using the history
keyword and setting it to 1. For example to set second output of the previous frame as the input.

338

User Guide / Jitter / Render Passes

<input subpass="mysubpass" output="1" history="1" />

339

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

Textures
Creating a Texture

341

Texture output

343

Converting to a Matrix
Procedural Textures

344
344

3D Textures

345

A Texture is a collection of data, organized as an array of pixel data and stored in texture memory
on the GPU. Textures commonly hold image data—they have the name "texture" because they're
often applied to the surface of a 3D model to change its appearance. However, a texture can hold
any kind of data that can be expressed as an array of numbers.

An image of chili peppers, mapped as a texture onto the surface of a sphere

Because textures are managed by the GPU, they can be processed much faster than the equivalent
matrix, which is managed by the CPU. For tasks like distorting or manipulating an image, it's almost
always more efficient to work with a texture than a matrix.

340

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

Creating a Texture
The Max object for managing textures is called jit.gl.texture. Similar to objects like jit.matrix and
buffer~, every Jitter texture has a name, and objects send a message like
jit_gl_matrix u1234567 to other objects to refer to a specific texture. Like matrices, Jitter
textures have a dimension and a type. The type of a texture determines the resolution of each pixel.
For example, a char type can have 256 different values, while a float32 type can have millions
of different values.

If a texture isn't given an explicit name, Max will assign it a unique name automatically.

Graphics context
All textures are belong to a particular graphics context, usually a window managed by jit.world, or
else a view managed by jit.pworld. Use the @drawto attribute to explicitly assign a texture to one
context or another.

341

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

Use @drawto to bind a jit.gl.texture to a particular graphics context.

If you don't assign jit.gl.texture a value for @drawto , it will bind to the first graphics
context that it can find. If there is more than one graphics context, it's undefined which
context it will bind to. It's common to see @drawto omitted when there is only one
graphics context.

Loading from a video or image
You can fill a texture with an image by sending it the read message. After reading, the texture will
store the contents of the image in memory. If you don't give the texture an explicit value for @dim ,
then the dimensions of the texture will adapt to fit the image.

342

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

Even though both texture objects loaded the same image, the dimensions are different because one texture does
not have an explicit value for @dim.

Adapt
When a jit.gl.texture receives another texture as input, it copies that input texture. If the @adapt
attribute is enabled, the jit.gl.texture will also update its dimensions and type to match that of the
input. The @adapt attribute defaults to active, unless an explicit value for @dim is set.

Texture output
Many Jitter objects have an attribute @output_texture that can be enabled in order to configure
them for texture output. When streaming video, either from a camera with jit.grab or from a file
with jit.movie or jit.playlist, enable @output_texture to stream to a texture as opposed to a
matrix. Similarly, toggle @output_texture on a jit.world object to capture the entire render output
as a texture. When using jit.gl.node to render to an offscreen context, use @capture 1 instead of
@output_texture 1 to get a texture output from jit.gl.node.

343

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

Three important objects that can be configured for texture output

Converting to a Matrix
Remember that Jitter matrices reside on the CPU, while Jitter textures are managed by the GPU.
Because of this, converting an texture to a matrix or a matrix to a texture requires copying data
from one processor to the other. This can take an undefined amount of time, and so Max provides
both a synchronous and an asynchronous method to convert matrices to textures.

jit.matrix
You can send a Jitter texture directly to a jit.matrix object. Max will read the data from the texture
and store it in the matrix. This is the synchronous way of converting a texture to a matrix. It's the
fastest way to get the result, but it can block other rendering commands during the data copy. If
you're trying to copy a texture to a matrix during a live performance, it's usually better to use
jit.gl.asyncread.

jit.gl.asyncread
This object uses a double-buffering technique to copy data to a matrix without blocking. Because of
this, you're safe to use jit.gl.asyncread as much as you want, even during other real-time rendering.
However, since the process is asynchronous, you're guaranteed to incur one frame of delay durin
the copy. Most of the time this doesn't matter, and it's fine to use jit.gl.asyncread unless you're
doing something very specific.

Procedural Textures

344

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

In addition to loading textures from an image file, or copying them from a Jitter matrix, you can also
generate texture procedurally.

jit.gl.pix
The jit.gl.pix object uses the Gen object namespace to define a pixel shader. One way to make a
procedural texture is by using the cell, dim, norm, and snorm objects.

A simple procedural shader defined with jit.gl.pix

jit.gl.slab
The jit.gl.slab object works very similarly to jit.gl.pix, except it load a shader definition from a Jitter
XML Shader or JXS description file. Generator shaders like gn.stripes.jxs can use texture
coordinates to fill a texture procedurally, just like you might do with jit.gl.pix.

3D Textures
Most textures have two dimensions, but Jitter supports 3D textures as well. This can be useful
when generating your own textures, or when using textures to do simulations or other kinds of

345

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

computation. To create a 3D texture, simply set the @dim attribute of a texture to be a list of three
numbers, one for the size of each dimension.

A three-dimensional texture

When working with a 3D texture, you must set the @rectangle attribute to zero. This
may change with a future version of Max, but it's necessary for now.

You can fill a 3D texture directly by sending it a 3D matrix. As usual when converting from a matrix,
Max will simply copy the matrix to the texture. However, you can also use two-dimensional images
to fill each slice of the 3D texture one-by-one. If you want to fill a 3D texture using a series of 2D
matrices, use the message subtex_matrix in conjunction with the @dstdimstart and
@dstdimend attributes. Open the example patcher subtex.3d for a demo.

You can also fill a 3D texture using a series of 2D textures. For this method, set the @slice
attribute of the 3D texture object before sending it a two-dimensional texture. See the example
patcher tex3d.warpy to see how this works in practice.

To pull a 2D texture slice from a 3D texture, you must use a shader program that takes a 3D texture
input. The built-in JXS file td.plane3d.jxs implements a shader program that can sample a
specific slice from a 3D texture using either an offset parameter or with a secondary map texture.
Use this shader with jit.gl.slab to convert a 3D to a 2D texture.

346

User Guide / Jitter / Textures

Taking a 2D slice from a 3D texture with td.plane3d.jxs and jit.gl.slab

347

User Guide / Jitter / Video

Video
Playing a Video File

348

Using a Video Capture Device

350

Recording
Further Reading

350
353

The Jitter video engine supports streaming video from a webcam or other video capture device, as
well as playing a video from disk. Using the third party Syphon and Spout packages, it's also
possible to stream video to other applications.

For applications like random video access or rapid resequencing of video material, you might want
to consider loading your video into memory, or using a specially designed encoding like HAP.

Playing a Video File
Use the jit.movie object to stream a video from disk. This object uses the current video engine to
manage reading and streaming the video.

348

User Guide / Jitter / Video

The standard jit.movie object plays back audio directly using the video engine, rather than routing
audio through Max. Use the jit.movie~ object to use the audio tracks of the video file in Max. The
mc.jit.movie~ file makes the audio tracks available as multichannel audio.

Random Access
Use the rate message to change the playback speed of a jit.movie object. Use the frame and
jump messages to move between different parts of the video file.

Keep in mind that videos files are generally encoded in a way that optimizes linear playback from
start to finish. Depending on the size of the video file, your computer, and the specifications of your
hard drive, you might need to make a couple of changes to improve performance when jumping
around a video file.

When using the viddll engine, you can use the loadram message to pull an entire video file into
Max's application memory. Accessing application memory can be significantly faster than accessing
hard disk memory, and this might improve performance.

349

User Guide / Jitter / Video

The HAP codec (collection of codecs actually) is a specially designed video encoding that's made for
VJs and creative codeers. Depending on how you're using your video in Max, you might find that
jit.movie is more responsive when using the HAP codec.

Using a Video Capture Device
The jit.grab object manages access to video capture devices. Use the open and close messages
to get access to a particular capture device. The getvdevlist and getformatlist messages let
you fetch a list of capture devices and formats, which you can set with the vdevice and format
messages. Check the jit.grab helpfile for more details.

Recording
Max gives you a lot of flexibility when it comes to recording video, but there are three general
approaches: using jit.record/jit.vcr, using Syphon or Spout to send video to an external recorder like
OBS, or frame-by-frame export with jit.matrix and exportimage .

Recording with jit.record and jit.vcr
The jit.record and jit.vcr objects let you record a stream of Jitter matrices to disk. In terms of video
recording the two objects are the same, except jit.vcr can record audio as well as video. This is the
simplest and most straightforward way to record video. For higher quality recording, consider
recording with Syphon, Spout, and OBS.

350

User Guide / Jitter / Video

You can use the @codec attribute to change the codec used for recording, from prores444 for a
high quality recording with alpha, to h264 for a lossy encoding and a smaller file size. The jit.record
object can record frames as it receives them (non-realtime mode, the default), in which case you'll
need to be sure that your recording FPS (frame per second) matches the FPS of your Jitter patcher.
Finally, note that jit.record and jit.vcr both record matrices, not Jitter textures. If you want to record
a texture, use jit.gl.asyncread to convert textures to matrices.

The jit.gl.asyncread object converts textures to matrices for recording

Recording with Syphon, Spout, and OBS

351

User Guide / Jitter / Video

If you want to make a higher quality recording, often it's better to send textures through Syphon or
Spout to an external application like OBS. After installing Syphon or Spout, create the apporpriate
server object: jit.gl.syphonserver for Syphon, and jit.gl.spoutsender for Spout. If you're
using jit.world, enable the @output_texture attribute to make sure that jit.world is sending its
texture as an output.

If you're using jit.world, you'll need to make sure that the texture size coming out of
jit.world matches what OBS is expectind to record. Set the @dim attribute to match
the canvas resolution in OBS. You'll also need to include a jit.gl.camera object in
your patcher, to make the viewport size independent of the jit.world window size.

Using jit.gl.syphonserver to send textures from Max to OBS

To record audio as well as video, create a new Audio Capture source in OBS, and configure this for
Application Capture. Set the application to Max, and you can record audio from Max at the same

352

User Guide / Jitter / Video

time as you record video.

A simple OBS setup for recording video with audio from Max

OBS audio sources may not support Application Capture on Windows. You can use
Desktop Capture, or you can use a third-party application to route audio from Max to
OBS. We recommend Voicemeeter or JACK.

Recording with frame-by-frame with jit.matrix and exportimage
For total control over the recording process, you can explore a non-realtime recording setup. This
will look something like the digital equivalent of stop motion filmmaking. After rendering your
scene, capture the output in a jit.matrix object. Send that object the exportimage message to save
the image to disk. Later, use FFmpeg to render a final video from your sequence of images.

Further Reading
For a more in-depth tutorial concerning recording video from Max, check out this article.

353

User Guide / Jitter / Video Engine

Video Engine
Changing the Video Engine
Platform Specifics

354
355

Codec and Format Support

355

jit.grab

355

The Video Engine is responsible for interfacing with the operating system to manages access to
video hardware devices and to video files on disk.

Changing the Video Engine
Max's Video Engine preference allows users to switch the backend video implementation for all
video objects.

Objects affected include jit.movie, jit.record, jit.playlist, and jit.matrixset. Still image loading may be
affected by the video engine for jit.matrix and jit.gl.texture. Individual jit.movie, jit.grab and
jit.record objects may override the Video Engine application preference by typing @engine ,
followed by the engine name argument, into the Max object box.

Objects previously initialized are unaffected by a preference change, therefore open
patches should be closed and reopened after switching the video engine.

354

User Guide / Jitter / Video Engine

Platform Specifics
Max ships with support for two video engines on Mac platforms, avf (AVFoundation - the default)
and viddll (Viddll - FFmpeg), and two on Windows, viddll (the default) and qt (DirectShow). The
DirectShow based engine is named qt for historical reasons, and has limited functionality. Windows
users wishing to install third-party codecs for the qt engine should follow the instructions here. The
viddll engine utilizes the FFmpeg library to provide support for a wide variety of file formats and
codecs. Both avf and viddll engines provide native playback support for HAP encoded video files.

Codec and Format Support
Common supported codecs for movie file reading with jit.movie and jit.playlist and file writing with
jit.record and jit.matrixset:

H264
Photo-Jpeg
ProRes (422 and 4444)
Animation (viddll only)
Many additional formats and codecs when using viddll
Supported image types for file reading with jit.matrix and jit.gl.texture:

JPEG
PNG
TIFF
GIF

jit.grab
The jit.grab object is unaffected by the video engine preference. On Mac, jit.grab will use
AVFoundation as the video digitizer, and on Windows DirectX is used. Additionally both platforms

355

User Guide / Jitter / Video Engine

include native support for Blackmagic video input devices. See the Blackmagic tab of the jit.grab
help file for more information.

356

User Guide / Max Interface

Max Interface

357

User Guide / Max Interface / Action Menu

Action Menu
Viewing the Action Menu

358

Parts of the Action Menu
Using the Action Menu

358
360

The Action Menu lets you explore, transform, and interact with objects in your patcher. It groups
together common operations on an object, like viewing its attributes or messages. It also gives you
access to Transformations, which are a powerful way to refactor your patcher.

Viewing the Action Menu
With the patcher unlocked, hover near the middle-left side of the object until a green arrow
appears.

Click the arrow to reveal the action menu.

Parts of the Action Menu

358

User Guide / Max Interface / Action Menu

Name

Description

Attributes

Lists the current state of all the object's attributes. Select an attribute from the
Attributes submenu to create an attrui object attached to the object, configured
with the given attribute.

Messages

Select a message from the Messages submenu to create a message box attached
to the object containing the given message. You'll typically want to type in an
argument after the message name in the newly created message box.

Files

If the object can read in a file, like sfplay~ or jit.movie~, then this option will list
all compatible files in Max's search path. Selecting any one will load that file into
the object.

Prototypes

Select a prototype from the submenu to replace the object with a new version
containing a collection of attributes. See prototypes.

Apply

Choose a prototype from the submenu to apply the collection of attributes to

Changes

the object. See prototypes.

Connect

(UI objects only.) Assign a connectable parameter. See Connecting Parameters.

Transform

Transformations defined for this object. See transform.

Inspector

Open the inspector for this object.

Style

Choose a style for this object.

Help

Open the help patcher for this object.

359

User Guide / Max Interface / Action Menu

Reference

Open the object reference for this object.

Edit

Perform the same action as double-clicking on the object. For example js and coll
open a text editor to edit their contents. MIDI objects such as noteout display a
menu of MIDI ports.

Additions
Some objects, like gen~ for example, may add their own actions to the action menu. In this case,
gen~ adds the "Reset Parameters" option which, as you might expect, resets all the parameters of
the gen~ object in question.

Using the Action Menu
The action menu provides quick access to two of the most powerful ways to modify an object in
place: transforms and prototypes.

Transform
Transformations let you change the way an object is represented, without changing its behavior.
Usually you'd do this because it's more convenient to work with an object in a different
representation.

360

User Guide / Max Interface / Action Menu

Transform > Changed Attributes to Arguments

This option takes all of the attributes on the given object that have been modified from their
original state, and includes them as initial attribute values in the object box. This can be a useful
alternative to freezing attributes, and is a handy way to "lock in" the current state of an object.

Transform > Multi Channel Version / Single Channel Version

Convert between single- and multi-channel versions of an MSP object. Usually this will involve
adding or removing the mc. prefix.

Transform > Patcher to Bpatcher

This extremely useful option converts a subpatcher to a bpatcher. If you end up adding interface
controls to a subpatcher, this is a great way to expose the presentation view of your subpatcher at
the top level.

Prototype

361

User Guide / Max Interface / Action Menu

Prototypes store configurations of a given object, such as the range and colors of a slider. Choosing
an item from the Prototype submenu replaces the object with the prototype. Choosing an item
from the Apply Changes submenu updates the existing object with the changed attributes stored in
the prototype file.

362

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

Documentation Window
Using the Documentation Window

363

Using the Object Reference

366

Using the Package Documentation
Searching the Documentation

370
372

The documentation window gives you combined access to core parts of Max's documentation.

User Guide: Full-page explanation of Max, its systems, and how to work with them.
Object Reference: Detailed descriptions of individual objects, including all the messages and
attributes that each object understands
Package Documentation: Guides specific to a particular package, written by the package
author
In addition to this, each object also has its own help file, which demonstrates the object's
functionality in the context of a working patcher. And there is even more documentation online.
The JavaScript API is one example of API documentation, listing all of the functions and classes you
can use to extend Max with JavaScript. Finally, you can find examples and tutorials online as well,
which introduce concepts gradually and show some of what's possible with Max.

Using the Documentation Window
Open the documentation window by selecting User Guide from the Help menu. This will open the
documentation window, focusing on the User Guide.

363

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

As mentioned earlier, the in-app documentation is divided into three main sections: the User Guide,
Object Reference, and Package Documentation. You can navigate through the different parts of the
documentation window using the icons at the top of the window.

Back: Navigates to the previously visited page
Forward: After navigating back, returns to the original page
Documentation Home: Go to the documentation home page
History: Click to display a list of recently visited pages
User Guide: Show the User Guide
Object Reference: List and search the available Max objects
Package Documentation: Show documentation for installed packages
Search: Open the search view

364

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

Open Online Version: Open the documentation online
The left side of the documentation window shows the navigation for the current documentation
area. In the User Guide, this lists user guide pages organized by topic. You can click the Hide
Navigation icon to toggle the navigation display.

The Navigation icon lets you hide and show the navigation.

The navigation lets you jump from page to page, but you can also quickly jump through the
contents of a particular page by using the in-page navigation. If you make the documentation
window wider, the On this Page navigation will appear.

365

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

The page navigation appears when the documentation window is wide enough

Using the Object Reference
Click the Reference icon to display the object reference list.

366

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

On the left side of the page, you'll see the object reference navigation, which groups objects by
built-in section for native objects, and by package name for objects from third-party package. Click
on any entry in the navigation to list objects from that section.

On the right side of the page, above the object listing, you can use the drop down menu to further
refine the list of objects by category. For example, in the Gen section, you can select the buffer
category from the drop down to see only Gen objects that deal with buffer objects.

367

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

Click on an object to view the reference documentation for a specific object. Use the Open Help
button at the top of the object reference page to open the help patcher for that object. Under that
button, you'll see extensive reference for the object, including the arguments, attributes, and
messages that the object understands.

368

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

The reference documentation for the pattr object

Next to the entry for every attribute, argument, and message, you'll see the expected type for that
entry. For arguments, you'll also see the keyword optional appear if the value is optional, as well as
any default value the argument may have.

369

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

If you make the documentation window wide enough, you'll see On this Page navigation,
including a disclosure triangle to list arguments, attributes, and messages.

On this Page navigation for the pattr object

Using the Package Documentation
Click the Packages icon to display the package documentation.

370

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

On the left side of the page, you'll see a list of installed packages. If the package authors have
written any Guides, Topics, or Tutorials, you'll see those appear in the center of the documentation
window. Once you click on a particular entry, you'll see that entry appear.

371

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

At the top of a package documentation page, you'll see breadcrumbs showing you the path to the
current page. You can click Package Docs to return to the package documentation home page, or on
the name of the page to see just the documentation for that package.

Searching the Documentation
Click the Search icon in the top-right of the window to display the search view.

When you search, you'll see results from the User Guide, Object Reference, and Package Docs, but
you'll also see results from online as well, including API Reference and RNBO results. If there are
more than a few results in a given category, click More Results to view a page of results from just
that category.

372

User Guide / Max Interface / The Documentation Window

Documentation search results with the search term 'matrix'

373

User Guide / Max Interface / Extras Menu

Extras Menu
Included Extras

374

Package Extras

375

The Extras menu provides quick access to frequently used patchers. Max comes with a set of utility
patchers for everyday functions like testing MIDI input and opening the Global Transport, and you
can also add your own patchers to the Extras menu.

Included Extras
Extra

Description

Audiotester

Measures input and output levels for your audio setup, and can be used to
test your audio hardware and sound system.

DSP CPU Monitor

Shows the current approximate audio CPU utilization.

ExamplesOverview

Browse and launch examples included with Max.

GlobalTransport

Start, stop, and display the passage of time for objects that use Max Time
formats.

374

User Guide / Max Interface / Extras Menu

Human Interface Driver

Set up and test any object that support the hi object.

Tester
JitterTester

Tests video input devices.

KeyMidi

Use your computer keyboard as a MIDI keyboard.

Meterin and Meterout

Provide 24 channels of meters for audio input and output.

MIDI Tester

Display all MIDI input and output devices and lets you test your
connections.

Mousemeter

Tracks the mouse.

ObjectHelpLauncher

Fast way to open a help file.

Quickrecord

Quickly record the audio output, up to 8 channels.

UDP Tester

lets you test the sending of Max messages over a network using
UDP.

You can add your own patchers to the Extras menu by creating a Package with an extras folder.

Package Extras
Packages that you add to Max (from the Package Manager or by adding folders to the Packages
directory) will add patchers to the Extras menu as well. Most packages include a "launcher" patcher
that acts as an overview for the package, and some packages will have an extras folder that adds
even more patchers.

Adding extras
If you want to add your own patchers to the Extras menu, you can create a custom package and add
your patchers to the extras subfolder. See Packages for more information.

375

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

Inspector
Opening the Inspector

376

Inspector contents

377

Attribute Names

380

The Patcher Inspector
Freezing Attributes

381
381

Modifying and Resetting Attributes

382

View and modify the internal state of any Max object using the inspector.

Opening the Inspector
Open the inspector by clicking the Inspector icon in the right toolbar.

Opening the Inspector

.
You can also select Inspector from the Object menu as another way to open or close the inspector. If
you'd prefer to see the inspector in a separate window, select Inspector Window from the View

376

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

menu instead.

Inspector contents
The contents of the inspector are determined by the current selection. With a single object
selected, the inspector will show all attributes for that object.

Inspecting an object

With multiple object selected, the inspector will show all attributes that are shared by the selected
objects. Changing the value of a single attribute will update that attribute's value for all selected
objects.

Inspector Toolbar
The toolbar at the bottom of the inspector exposes several handy functions.

The inspector toolbar

Icon Name

Function

Modify Selected Item

Copy or change the value of an attribute.

377

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

Show Attribute Names

Show the programmatic ID of an attribute.

Show Column Header

Show the column headers for sorting.

Freeze Attribute

Freeze or unfreeze an attribute.

Make Attribute in

Create an attrui object in the patcher to modify the selected

Patcher

attribute.

Show in Reference

Open the reference documentation for the selected object
attribute.

Show Object

Highlight and focus the selected object in the patcher view.

Finding your attribute
Some objects can have a lot of attributes. At the very top of the inspector window, a text input lets
you display only those attributes whose text matches the contents of your filter. The match includes
the attribute name, not just its display name, and so the filter text "var" will match the attribute
varname with the display name "Scripting Name", even if Show Attribute Name is not enabled.

Filtering the inspector

The tabs underneath the filter input select for attributes matching a given category. Attributes in
the Basic tab are the most common attributes for the selected object. Attributes under Layout
handle the positioning and appearance of the object. Recent shows attributes most recently
modified for the object, and the All tab shows all attributes. Click and hold the All tab to show the
subcategories of all attributes, and pick one to open just the disclosure tab for that subcategory.

378

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

Show subcategories under All

Sorting attributes
It's possible to sort attributes by name or by value. In the bottom toolbar, click on the Show Column
Header icon in the bottom toolbar to reveal the headers of the inspector table.

With the headers revealed, click on any header to sort all attributes based on the value of that
column. Click on the header again to switch between ascending and descending sort.

Dragging attributes

379

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

You can drag rows from the inspector into your Max patch. When you do so, Max will create a new
attrui object, configured to display the selected attribute. In this way you can quickly build an
interface for controlling a particular set of attributes.

Drag and drop attributes from the inspector to create attrui objects

If you drag the attribute on top of an existing object, Max will automatically connect the attrui
object to the target object. Finally, you can hold down the option key while dragging to display a
popup menu with more options, including an option to create a message box containing the current
value of the attribute.

Attribute Names
Attributes can be identified by their Display Name, a brief, human-readable description, or by their
Scripting Name, a unique identifier used to fetch the attribute programatically. By default, the
inspector hides the scripting name and shows only the display name. The Show Attribute Name
button in the inspector toolbar lets you toggle the visibility of the scripting name of each attribute.

380

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

Enable 'Show Attribute Names' to display the scripting name of each attribute.

The Patcher Inspector
The Patcher itself is, behind the scenes, just a Max object like any other. Many properties of the
patcher, like the patcher background color, can be controlled by modifying the attributes of the
patcher. To access the patcher inspector, open up the inspector with no object selected. An icon will
appear at the top of the empty inspector view, which you can click to access the Patcher Inspector.

An empty inspector, revealing the 'Show Patcher Inspector' icon at the top of the inspector view.

Freezing Attributes
Most attributes, like font size or scripting name, are saved with the patcher and will be restored
when you reopen the patcher later. However, some attributes are not stored by default, and will
appear italicized in the object inspector.

381

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

Unsaved attributes are shown in italics

If you want to save the value of an attribute, you can use the snowflake icon in the inspector
toolbar to freeze the attribute. Frozen attributes will embed their current value with the patcher, so
that this value can be restored when the patcher is next opened. Once the attribute is frozen, the
display name will show the frozen value of the attribute. It is also possible to freeze attributes that
are normally saved with the patcher. Once an attribute is frozen in its way, the frozen value is the
value that will be restored when the patcher is closed and reopened. It might be useful to freeze an
attribute like this to "anchor" it to the frozen value, rather than its current value.

The frequency attribute, after it's been frozen.

Modifying and Resetting Attributes
The Modify icon in the bottom toolbar lets you copy, revert, and reset the value of a given attribute.

382

User Guide / Max Interface / Inspector

The gear icon in the left of the bottom toolbar

Select an attribute, then click on this icon to access several options related to the value of the
attribute.

The expanded 'Modify Selected Item' menu.

Menu Item

Description

Copy

Copy the value of the attribute to the clipboard. Once the value is copied, you

Attribute

can paste the value to another attribute using the Paste command from the Edit
menu.

Revert Value

If the value of the attribute has been modified since the last time the inspector
was opened, this option lets you set the attribute back to its original value.

Set to

Reset the value of the attribute to its default. Not all attributes have a default

Default Value

value, so this option might not be enabled for all attributes.

Set to Frozen
Value

If you've frozen the attribute, establishing a new saved value for the attribute,
you can use this option to set the attribute to the frozen value.

383

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Object Reference
Sidebar
Full Reference

384
390

Every object in Max not only has a dedicated help file, but also a reference page. This page
completely describes the object's behavior, inlcuding:

A short and long description of the object's functionality
The Arguments and attributes that can configure the object
The symbols that the object understands
Other related object and documentation

Sidebar
You can view an abbreviated form of the full reference for an object by clicking on the Reference
icon in the right sidebar.

384

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

The reference sidebar view will display reference documentation for whichever object is currently
selected in the patcher.

With the buffer~ object selected, the sidebar view displays reference documentation for that object.

Filtering the sidebar
The top of the sidebar view shows a short description of the object. Using the text field above the
description, you can filter the contents of the sidebar view to find the entry that you're looking for.

385

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Arguments
The first section of the reference list view is for arguments. In this section, you can see all of the
arguments that the object expects. Next to the name of the argument, you will see a short
description of what the argument does. Click on an argument to select it, and a detailed description
of that argument will appear at the bottom of the view.

Messages
Under the arguments section, the messages section lists all of the messages that the object can
understand. Click on a message to see a detailed description of that message at the bottom of the

386

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

view.

387

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

You can drag and drop a row from the Messages section into an unlocked patcher.
When you do, a message box will appear in the patcher.

Attributes
The attributes section lists all of the selected object's attributes. As in the other sections, click on
the attribute to see a detailed description of the attribute in the detail view at the bottom of the
sidebar reference.

You can also drag and drop a row from the Attributes section into an unlocked patcher.
When you do, an attrui object will appear in the patcher, pre-configured to select for
the named attribute.

388

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

See also
The last section of the sidebar reference is the See Also section. This section lists related objects
and documentation. You can double-click on any object in this section to open the help file for that
object, and you can double-click on any piece of documentation in this section to open it.

Navigation
Use the buttons in the Navigation Bar at the bottom of the view to quickly jump to related pages.

389

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Show Previous Object — Jump to the sidebar reference for the last selected object.
Show Next Object — After pressing Show Previous Object, navigate forwards again.
Open Full Reference - Show the Full Reference for the selected object.
Open Help File — Open the help file for the selected object.

Full Reference
Accessing the full reference
You can access the full reference for a selected object in a variety of ways.

Right-click on the object and select Open Reference from the contextual menu.

From the object action menu, select Reference.

390

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

With the object selected, click on the object name in the clue bar, and select Reference from the
menu.

Select the object, then select Open Reference from the Help menu.

391

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Finally, you can open the reference sidebar, and then click the Open Full Reference button in the
bottom navigation bar.

Using the full reference
The full reference for an object is an extended version of the abbreviated reference available in the
sidebar view. At the top of the reference document, you'll see the name of the object, a short and
long description, a longer discussion about the object, and a button to open the help file. At the
very top, you'll see breadcrumbs that show the path to the reference file in Max's documentation.

392

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

The left side of the page shows the location of this reference document in Max's overall
documentation. The primary Max documentation categories are listed here, in addition to a section
Package Documentation that lists all the documentation for installed packages.

393

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

On the right side of the page, you'll see a navigation menu similar to the section categories from the
sidebar reference view. From here you can jump to any section on the page, including the
documentation for each argument, attribute, and message that the object supports. Additionally,
the Output section describes what messages or signals the object will send out.

In the Arguments section, you'll see a detailed description of each argument. In addition to a
description, you'll see the text OPTIONAL if the argument is optional, and you'll see the expected
type of the argument as well. If the type is [number] , it means that the argument can be an int or a
float.

394

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

The Attributes section lists attributes in a similar way. Note that for some attributes, you may see a
special label indicating the version of Max in which this attribute was introduced.

The Messages section lists all of the messages to which the object responds. A message will have
the special symbol (mouse) to indicate how the object will respond to mouse clicks. The symbol
signal indicates how the object will handle signal inputs.

395

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Finally, the Output section will describe what kinds of messages and signals the object generates.
This optional section is most common for signal objects.

396

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Object parent classes
The full reference for an object documents every message and attribute for that object. Some
objects have many, many messages and attributes, especially objects that have a parent class.

Max objects don't have a strict notion of inheritance like you might find in object-oriented
programming languages like C++. However, certain Max object do have a parent class from which
the inherit many common messages and attributes. For example, the jit.gl.gridshape object inherits
from the Common object class and the OB3D object class.

Common - The class that all objects with an object box inherit from. Adjust things like the
font, background color, and the annotation.
OB3D - The parent class for all objects that manage an object in a 3D computer graphics
scene. Attributes let you control things like the matrix transform and the color.
In the reference page for an object like this, you'll see a list of object parent classes with a
disclosure triangle next to each.

Click on the disclosure triangle to see the attributes or messages that the current object inherited
from the given parent class.

397

User Guide / Max Interface / Object Reference

Some of the messages that all objects from the OB3D object class will respond to

398

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Preferences
Audio

401

Color and Theme

402

Console

403

Debugger
Files and Folders

403
403

Interface

404

Jitter
jweb

405
406

Language

406

Mixer

406

Mouse Wheel
Node for Max

407
407

OSC

407

Patching
Plugins

408
410

RNBO

410

Recording
Scheduler

410
411

Text Editing

411

Preferences Window Toolbar

412

Use the Preferences window to control the behavior of the whole application, including audio
driver settings, the default appearance of the patcher window, the behavior of the Max interface,
scheduler parameters, and more. On Mac, Preferences... ⌘, (macOS) appears in the application (Max)
menu. On Windows, Preferences... CTRL, (Windows) appears in the Options menu.

Audio - Configure audio I/O, sample rate, and other audio performance preferences
Color and Theme - Choose a preset color scheme
Console - Configure the Max Console window
Debugger - Set the debug event queue size
Files and Folders - Configure default folders

399

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Interface - Customize the user interface
Jitter - Select the graphics and video engines
Jweb - Configure integrated web browsing
Language - Localize the user interface
Mixer - Configure the audio mixer
Mouse Wheel - Enable the mouse wheel for zooming
Node for Max - Set options for using Node
OSC - Open Sound Control network setup
Patching - Customize your patching experience
Plugins - Set up plug-in scanning
RNBO - Configure RNBO startup and logging
Recording - Choose the audio quick recording format
Scheduler - Customize scheduler performance settings
Text Editing - Customize text editing
Preferences Toolbar - Using the Preferences window toolbar

400

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

The preferences window with the Interface tab active

Audio

Audio

Choose an audio driver from the menu. Mac users will typically use Core Audio

Driver

while Windows user will use MME (is this right?) or ASIO. The NonRealTime driver
permits you to capture audio processing to a sound file. For more information on
the NonRealTime driver, refer to Recording. To disable audio, choose None as the
driver.

Input

Choose a device for audio input. For the selected audio driver, the Input Device

Device

menu will display the available audio input devices.

Output

Choose a device for audio output. For the selected audio driver, the Input Device

Device

menu will display the available audio output devices.

Other
Driver

Depending on the selected audio driver, there may be more options available
below the Output Device.

Options

401

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Sampling Rate

Choose a sampling rate from the menu. Depending on the selected audio
driver and hardware devices, the menu may display different available
sampling rates. Typical available sampling rates are 44100, 48000, 88200, and
96000 Hz.

I/O Vector Size

Set the number of samples received and set to the audio driver at one time.
Smaller values may be more computationally expensive but typically result in
lower I/O latency.

Signal Vector

Set the number of samples computed at one time. Smaller values may be more

Size

computationally expensive. The maximum signal vector size is equal to the
current I/O vector size. Very small vector sizes (1, 2) may not work properly.

Overdrive

Set whether the Max scheduler runs in a separate high-priority thread.
Overdrive is required for accurate timing.

Scheduler in
Audio

Set whether the Max scheduler runs synchronously with audio processing,
before each signal vector. When enabled, scheduler events are sample-

Interrupt

accurate with respect to audio in most cases.

CPU Limit

Establish whether audio processing should be skipped if the computation
exceeds a set percentage of the available CPU. The default setting of 0 does
not limit the amount of audio processing.

Color and Theme

Color

Select an available Theme that configures colors used for the user interface. Themes

Theme

also supply default colors for the patcher and objects.

Follow

Select how Max responds to color theme changes in Live. When set to On the color

Live

theme selected in Live will be used when Max is launched from Live to edit a Max

Theme

for Live device. When set to Persist , the last color theme selected in Live when
Max launched to edit a Max For Live device will be used in Max when it is launched
directly as an application. When to Off the Live theme will never be used in Max,
potentially leading to color differences in the appearance of a device in Live and
Max.

402

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Syntax

Select a theme for patcher syntax coloring that overrides the default colors in the

Color

chosen theme. When set to Theme Default the default theme colors are used for

Theme

syntax coloring. Note that the syntax color theme is reset to Theme Default when
you choose a different color theme.

Syntax

When enabled, text in object boxes will be colorized. The colors used will reflect

Coloring

the curent Color Theme or Syntax Color Theme.

Console

Max Console
Dequeue Chunk

The maximum number of lines posted in the Max Console per update.
Increasing the value above the default (128) will make the console more

Size

responsive but could slow down redrawing elsewhere.

Max Console

Choose a font for the console from the menu or open the font panel. You

Font Name

can also change the console font and size by choosing Show Fonts from the
Object menu when the Max console is the frontmost window.

Max Console

Size of the font used in the Max console.

Font Size
Max Console
Queue Size

The total number of lines to the Max console that can be posted by objects
such as print before an update occurs.

Debugger

Illustration Mode

When using Illustration Mode or the debugger, this value, if non-zero,

Event Queue Size

limits the number of pending events stored from actions such as a running
metro object, moving a slider, or incoming MIDI.

Files and Folders

403

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Add Patchers to

If enabled, patcher files outside the search path will be added to the

the Search Path on

search path and become visible in the File Browser.

Save
Default Folder for

Newly created Max for Live projects will be saved to this folder by default.

Max for Live
Device Projects
Default Folder for

Newly created Projects will be saved to this folder by default.

Projects
Default Patcher

The selected Template will be used each time you create a patcher using

Template

New Patcher in the File menu. Any template can be used via the New
From Template submenu.

Save Dependency

When enabled, Max saves the full paths for some dependencies in

Paths

patcher files. Max can use these paths as a fallback if a file isn't currently
in the search path. Disabling this option is useful for source control
applications, so that the contents of a patcher file doesn't change based
on the computer or user where it was last edited.

URL Proxy

Enter a URL to use as a proxy service for web access. This is used by the
maxurl object as well as other web-based Max features such as the search
sidebar.

Interface

Arrow Keys

When enabled, you can scroll a window using the keyboard arrow keys.

Scroll
Patcher
Clue Bar

When enabled, the Clue Bar will be shown for newly opened patcher windows.

Shown by
Default

Changing this preference will not change the Clue Bar visibility in existing
windows.

Clues in
Toolbar

When set to Enabled, clues will be shown in the bottom toolbar and disappear
after a few seconds, permitting you to use the documentation menu if shown.
When set to Enabled (Hide on Mouse Over), the clue text will disappear when the

404

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

cursor enters the bottom toolbar. To show the documentation menu in
this case, press the ? or ^ keys while the clue is visible. Clues are always
shown in the Clue Bar instead of the bottom toolbar if the Clue Bar is
currently visible.
Check for Updates

When enabled, Max will alert you if new software updates are available.

Automatically
Export Image
Resolution (DPI)

Sets the DPI (dots per inch) resolution for PNG images exported from
Max via the Export Image... command in the File menu. Supports 72, 96,
150, and 300 DPI.

Native Font Panel
(Mac only)

When enabled, uses the OS font panel instead of the one provided by
Max.

Recover Edits After

Sets how edits to a patcher are restored after a crash. When set to

Crash

Always, previous patcher edits will be restored when Max is restarted.
When set to Never, no edits will be restored. If set to Ask, you'll be
prompted at startup whether to restore patcher edits.

Restore Windows

If enabled, Max will attempt to re-open all previously open patcher

on Launch

windows when launched.

Show Scroll Bars

Sets the window scroll bar style. When set to Dynamically, scroll bars
appear when using a mouse wheel or mousing over the edge of a
window. When set to Always, scroll bars appear if content in a window
can be scrolled. When set to System Default, the system-wide user
preference determines the scroll bar style.

Space Bar Accepts

If enabled, a space bar will accept the currently highlighted

Autocompletion

autocompletion value. If disabled, the space bar will insert a space into an
object box without inserting the autocompletion text.

Jitter

Default

Set the default cache size (in gigabytes) for jit.movie and jit.playlist objects

Cache Size

when instantiated using viddll the engine.

Default GL
Context

Set the name of the default GL context. When a context is set, any GL or
animation object that doesn’t have a user provided context will be added to the

405

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

default context. A jit.world, jit.window, or jit.pwindow object of the same name
as the default must also be instantiated.
Graphics

Select the Graphics Engine

Engine
Video Engine

Select the Video Engine

jweb

Remote
Debugging

Sets the remote debugging port for jweb / CEF. After a port is set, restart Max
and open a patcher with a jweb object that has web content loaded. Then open

Port

a web browser, navigate to http://localhost:[port number] , and a link to
each jweb instance in max will apear for debugging.

Force jweb

When set to Onscreen or Offscreen, all jweb objects will render in one of these

Render Mode

two modes, no matter how they are configured individually. Mostly useful for
debugging. Requires a Max restart to take effect.

Language

Language

Select the language used in the interface. The menu will only show English (en)
unless Max was installed with the available Japanese installer.

Mixer

Enable Mixer Crossfade
(Adds Latency)

When set to On, Max will crossfade between new and old versions
of your editing operations when audio is turned on.

Enable Mixer Parallel

When enabled, audio in each top-level patchers will be processed in

Processing

its own thread.

Mixer Crossfade Latency

Set the latency of the mixer when crossfading editor operation in
milliseconds.

406

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Mixer Crossfade Ramp

Sets the cross-fade time (in milliseconds) used during an editing

Time

crossfade (if enabled).

Mouse Wheel

Mouse Wheel

If set to Standard, zooming follows the same direction as mouse wheel

Zoom Direction

scrolling. If set to Reversed, zooming increases in the opposite direction to
scrolling.

Mouse Wheel

Sets the mouse scroll wheel sensitivity when used for zooming in and out

Zoom Sensitivity

of a patcher window. Set to 0 to disable zooming with the mouse wheel.

Node for Max

Enable Node for Max
Logging

When enabled, Node for Max objects will write console.log

Debug Log Filename

File name of the log file that Node for Max will write, if Node for

messages to a log file.

Max logging is enabled.
Debug Log Folder

Folder in which Node for Max will write its log file, if Node for Max
logging is enabled.

OSC

Send OSC Default

Enable / disable sending OSC. Can be overridden by each patcher in the
patcher inspector.

Default Remote

Remote UDP address to send OSC to when enabled. Can be overridden

UDP Address

by each patcher in the patcher inspector.

Default Remote
UDP Port

Remote UDP port to send OSC to when enabled. Can be overridden by
each patcher in the patcher inspector.

407

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Receive OSC Default

Enable / disable listening for OSC. Can be overridden by each patcher
in the patcher inspector.

Default Local UDP
Port

Local UDP port to listen for OSC on when enabled. Can be overridden
by each patcher in the patcher inspector.

Enable OSCQuery

Enable / disable an http server to serve OSCQuery requests. Individual

Server

patchers can add or remove themselves from the list of OSCQuery
sources.

OSCQuery Port

Local http port to listen for OSCQuery requests on.

OSC Address Prefix

What kind of prefix to add, if any, to OSC addresses generated by Max.

Type
OSC Address Prefix

The prefix to add to OSC addresses generated by Max.

OSC Value To Send

Whether to send raw (scaled) values, normalized values if they exist, or
both.

Use /param Prefix

Whether to add the prefix /param to addresses generated by Max.

For Parameters
OSC Enabled Default

Enable / disable OSC by default for individual objects. Can be
overridden in the inspector for each OSC-capable object.

Patching

Assistance

When enabled, bubbles appear to describe an object's inlets and outlets when

Bubbles

you move the cursor over them. When disabled, the descriptions appear in the
Clue Bar.

Box Snap

Sets the horizontal snap margin in pixels. The snap margin is the space within

Margin

which the position or size of an object will automatically be changed to match
nearby objects.

Curved Patch

When disabled, patch cords will be straight and have sharp corners. See

Cords

examples below of the appearance of patch cords depending on the setting of
Curved Patch Cords.

408

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Curved patch cords enabled

Curved patch cords disabled

Disable Window
Animation

Disabling window animation may improve real-time performance of the
application.

(Windows only)
Edit Operations

When enabled, any loadbang or loadmess objects present in what is

Trigger Loadbang

pasted or restored when performing an Undo or Redo operation will
produce output.

Enable Patching

When enabled, shortcuts as defined in Patching Mechanics will be

Mechanics

available.

Exit on Last
Window Closed

When enabled, Max will quit when the last application window is closed.
When disabled, the Max console window will appear once all windows are

(Windows only)

closed to avoid quitting the application.

High DPI
Rendering

On compatible Windows OS versions, enables a higher resolution display
for the application which may involve using more than one physical screen

(Windows only)

pixel per logical pixel. This can improve the appearance of fonts and other
graphics at the possible cost of decreated overall graphics performance.

Keep Duplicated

When enabled, duplicated objects will be placed inside the current visible

Objects in View

area of the patcher window. When disabled, objects will be dulplicated
relative to original object position and may end up outside the visible area
of the patcher window.

Layout Bubbles

When enabled, coordinate information will appear in a bubble when
moving or resizing an object. When disable, this information will appear in
the Clue Bar.

Mouse Position
Determines Auto-

If enabled, a new auto-connected object will be created just below or
above an inlet or outlet that is closest to the current mouse location. If

Connection

disabled, new auto-connected objects will always connect to the first inlet
or outlet, though the object will be created at the mouse location.

409

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Patch Cord Wiggle

Sets the time, in milliseconds, of the patch cord "wiggle" animation during

Time (ms)

patching. Set this value to 0 to disable wiggling.

Prioritize Patch

When enabled, patch cords will be selected if they are over a box.

Cords
Segmented Patch

When enabled, clicking on outlet starts a segmented patch cord. When

Cords

disabled, you need to shift-click in order to make a segmented cord.

Plugins

Audio Plug-

If set to Minimal/Fast, audio plug-in scanning will look for audio plug-ins files, but

In Scanning

will not test or verify them. If set to Complete/Slow, audio plug-in scanning will
load and verify each plug-in before making it available to the application.
Complete scanning will also scan through "shell" plug-ins that contain multiple
other plug-ins.

Full Scan

Click the scan button to start a manual scan for audio plug-ins.

RNBO

Start RNBO
Server on Launch

When enabled, the RNBO server will start when Max is first launched.
When disabled, the RNBO server will not start until the first rnbo~ object
is created.

RNBO Log

File name of the log file that RNBO will write. If unspecified, RNBO will not

Filename

write to a log file.

RNBO Log Folder

Folder in which RNBO will write its log file, if RNBO logging is enabled.

RNBO Log Level

Set to Debug to log all messages, set to Error to log only error messages.

Recording

410

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Global Record Format

The bit depth and numeric type for audio files recorded with Global

(WAV)

Record

Global Record Red

When enabled, the Global Record button will be red while

Button

recording is active.

Scheduler

Event Interval

The approximate minimum time, or throttle limit, (in milliseconds) between

(ms)

handling of low-priority events. For advanced use.

Overdrive

When enabled, time-critical tasks in the Max scheduler run at a higher
priority, increasing timing accuracy.

Prioritize

When enabled, improves the accuracy of the scheduler potentially at the

Scheduler

cost of increased CPU usage. Only relevant when Overdrive is on and

Accuracy Over
CPU Usage

Scheduler in Audio Interrupt is off.

Poll Throttle

The number of events that are handled together in one tick of the
scheduler. For advanced use.

Queue Throttle

The number of events that are handled together at low priority. For
advanced use.

Redraw Queue

Scheduler performance parameter that sets the maximum number of

Throttle

patcher UI update events to process at a time. Lower values can lead to
more processing power available to other low-priority Max processes, and
higher values make the user interface more responsive (especially when
using many bpatchers). For advanced use.

Refresh Rate
(fps)

The rate limit (in fps) at which Max will update the UI for user interface
objects.

Scheduler Slop

Scheduler performance parameter that, roughly, balances accuracy with

(ms)

CPU efficiency. For advanced use.

Text Editing

411

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

Always Use

When enabled, Max will use an external text editor you specify using the

External Text

External Text Editor preference when editing text files for objects such as

Editor

coll and dict.

Edit Box Text on

When enabled, one click will begin editing the text in an object box, rather

Click

than two clicks.

External Text

Choose an application to use as an external text editor.

Editor
Typing Edits
Selected Box

When enabled, typing with an object selected will automatically start
editing that object's text.

Preferences Window Toolbar

Modify Selected Item displays a menu for acting on the selected preference. Copy
Attribute copies the current value of the preference to the clipboard. Revert Value,
which will be enabled if you've changed a preference, restores the value that was
set when you first opened the Preferences window.
Show Preferences Folder switches to the Finder (Mac) or Explorer (Windows) and
opens the Settings folder where Max stores its preferences. The file
maxpreferences.maxpref contains the settings edited in the Preferences window.
Audio I/O Mappings opens an editor window where you can assign virtual channels
(those used in adc~ and dac~) to real channels on the currently selected audio input
and output devices. If you're using stereo audio input and output devices, virtual
channels 1 and 2 are assigned to real channels 1 and 2 by default. For more
information, refer to Audio Channels.
Audio Driver Setup opens Audio MIDI Setup (Mac) or the Sounds and Audio
Devices Properties panel (Windows) to configure your audio setup at the operating
system level.

412

User Guide / Max Interface / Preferences

]>

Audio On/Off turns audio on or off globally.

413

User Guide / Max Interface / Search

Search
Using Search

415

Search in Max is a convenient way to search across many different areas all from a single text
prompt. Searching for the text "filter" will return signal processing objects, examples of filtering, and
online articles about filter design. Search in Max includes:

Max, Gen, and RNBO objects.
User Guide, installed Package documentation, and API Reference
Patchers and Snippets in the current search path
Plugins
Packages in the Package Manager
Forum posts
Click on the Search icon in the right toolbar to access search in the Search Sidebar.

414

User Guide / Max Interface / Search

Search in one place and find resources from the in-app documentation, your local files, and online articles.

Using Search
Start typing in the search box in the top-right to initiate a search. You'll see results grouped by
category, including objects, documentation, and examples. If more than a certain number of results
appear, you can click Show more results at the bottom each category to reveal more results.

415

User Guide / Max Interface / Search

When there's more than a few results per category, you can click to show more results.

Viewing results
Double-click on any search result to view it. The way Max opens a particular result depends on the
kind of result. For example, Max patchers will open in a new patcher window, and forum posts will
open a new web page in your default web browser.

Dragging results into your patch
You can add results from certain categories directly to your patch, like Objects, Examples, and
Patcher & Snippets. Click and drag a search result into your patch to add it. As mentioned in dragging
and dropping, you can hold option (macOS) or alt (Windows) while dragging to customize how
Max adds the resource to your patch.

Search details
At the bottom of the search sidebar, the Details Pane shows you more information about each
search result. The kinds of results that you see will depend on the type of each result. For example,
forum posts will show the author and post date, while Max patcher results will show the path to the
.maxpat file on your local disk, along with any semantic tags associated with that file.

416

User Guide / Max Interface / Search

Max patcher file results (left) will show you the path to the file, along with tags. Post results will show the author
and the post date.

417

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Patcher Toolbars
Customizing Toolbars

418

Left toolbar

419

Top toolbar
Right toolbar

434
436

Bottom toolbar

441

Max for Live Window

446

Gen Window
RNBO window

447
450

The top, left, right, and bottom of every Max window contain the toolbars. These icons allow you to
access built-in Max content, configure the behavior of your patcher, quickly access objects to add to
your patcher, and more.

Customizing Toolbars
If you want, you can pin/unpin any of the toolbars by hovering over the toolbar and clicking on the
triangular tab that appears in the middle of the toolbar. Hover over the hidden toolbar, near the
border of the patcher, to bring the toolbar back.

You can also customize each toolbar by adding or removing icons. To remove an icon, simply rightclick on it and choose the Remove option from the contextual menu.

418

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

You can also add icons to your toolbars by right-clicking and selecting an Add option from the
contextual menu. Each toolbar has different options for which icons can be added.

Right Toolbar- Select Add Browse Lessons to add a lesson browser.
Bottom Toolbar- This toolbar can add Mute and Solo buttons, which mute and solo the
audio output of the patcher.
Left Toolbar- The most customizable of all, since you can add a browse icon for any installed
package to this toolbar. You can also add an icon to open the Package Manager.

The left toolbar, customized to include an icon for the BEAP package

If you want your toolbars to keep their configuration the next time you open Max, right-click and
select Save Toolbar as Default. If you want to go back to the original toolbar configuration, select
Reset Toolbar to Factory Default.

Left toolbar
The left toolbar provides access to different collections of resources that you can use in your
patcher. For a more detailed, dedicated view of all the files in Max's search path, use the File
Browser.

419

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

From top to bottom:

1. Patcher List View- List, sort, and filter all of the objects in the current patcher.
2. Objects- Browse and filter all the objects in Max, including objects from installed packages.
3. Audio- Contains all the audio in Max's search path, with options to filter by name and
length.
4. Video- Browse all the videos in Max's search path.
5. Images- Browse all the images in Max's search path.
6. Plug-ins- Displays both VST and Audio Unit plug-ins, as well as Max for Live devices (also
known as AMXDs).
7. Max for Live- Special snippets and objects for Max for Live device development.
8. Modules- Categorized selections of objects and snippets from installed packages
9. Collections- Resources from collections as defined in the File Browser.
Optionally, you can also add a browser view for Gen DSP, Gen Jitter, or any installed package.

Patcher List View
The Patcher List View, which only functions when the patcher is unlocked, shows all of the objects
in the current patcher. Unlike the patcher view itself, which shows each object in its current
patching rectangle, this view simply displays the text of each object in a flat list.

The list view is helpful for locating, selecting, and operating on objects that might otherwise hard to
find in complex patchers.

Move the cursor over any element in the list to highlight the associated object, and click to select it.

420

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Objects within a subpatcher won't be included in the list, but you can double-click on a
subpatcher object to open that subpatcher.

Type in the Filter text entry at the top of the view to filter for objects matching specific text.

Use the Sort by drop-down to change how objects are sorted in the list, and use the Include dropdown to filter for UI Objects, Non-UI Objects, or All Objects.

421

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

With Non-UI Objects selected, user interface objects like the toggle, numbox, and ezdac~ are all excluded from the
object list.

When open, the list view will reflect the current selection in the patcher window. In addition, the
list view display of objects with values such as slider or number will update as the values of those
objects changes.

Operations on List View Items
Click any item to select it in the patcher. Shift-click to select multiple items.
Click on the round button that appears at the left edge of a list view item to open the
Object Action Menu for the object.

Double-click on any list view item to perform the same action as double-clicking on the
item in the patcher would perform. For instance, double-clicking on a patcher will open the
object's patcher window.

422

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Press return or enter on any selected object to send that object a bang message. For
example, selecting a button and pressing return will act as if you clicked on the button.
Dragging and Dropping
The following browsers, including the Object Browser, Audio Browser, etc., are convenient ways to
find resources that you can add to your patch. Once you've found what you're looking for, you can
just drag the resource into your patch to add it.

Depending on what kind of resource you're trying to add, the Max patcher will handle the drop in
different ways. If you drag an audio file into your patch, Max will create a playlist~ object to play
that file back. If you drag in a video file, Max will make a jit.playlist object.

When you drop an audio file into your patch, Max will create and configure a playlist~ object to play back that file.

Some resources can give you multiple options as to how they should be handled. Hold down Alt
(Windows) or Option (macOS) while dragging a resource into the patcher view to see all the
available options.

Hold down Alt/Option as you drag an audio file into your patcher to create a playlist~ object, an sfplay~ obect, a
buffer~ object, or a message box configured for that audio file.

423

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Finally, many Max object can handle resources of the appropriate kind. For example, if you drag an
audio file over a buffer~ object, you'll see a blue border appear inside buffer~, indicating that it can
perform a special action when you drop the file. Usually, if an object can load a file in response to
an open or read message, then it can handle a drag-and-drop action with that same file type.

When you drag-and-drop an audio file on top of a buffer~ object, the buffer~ will read the audio file and resize
itself to fit.

Object Browser
The Object Browser shows you all the objects that Max has to offer, with a couple of controls to
make it easier to find the object you're looking for.

Type into the Filter text entry at the top to find objects matching specific text.

Max has several Math Operators, small objects that perform a simple math operation like addition or
multiplication. By default, these objects are filtered from view, but you can select the Show Math

424

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Operators checkbox to reveal them.

The browser view on the left groups objects by package, and then by category within a package.
Click on a package to show all objects included in that package, and on a category to show just
objects in that category.

Finally, notice the description view at the bottom of the browser, which will show a short summary
when you roll over an object.

Audio Browser

425

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Audio Browser shows all of the audio samples in Max's search path. There are controls to filter
by name and length, and a preview option to audition samples as well.

Type into the Filter text entry at the top to find objects matching specific text.

You can deselect Include Built-in Content to filter out any content that shipped with Max. This
includes content from built-in packages, like BEAP and Jitter.

With the Duration filter active, you can use the slider to select only audio files that fall within a
certain length.

You could use a short duration filter to show only one-shots.

Hover over a sample and click the Play triangle to preview the sample. While the sample is playing,
the triangle will change to a Pause icon that you can use to pause playback.

426

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

If Auto Preview is enabled, each sound sample will start playing as soon as you select it. With this
option, you can use the arrow keys to move your selection up and down, quickly auditioning a large
number of files.

Finally,the Description view at the bottom of the browser will display the name of an audio file, the
full path to that file on disk, the length of the file, the number of audio channels in the file, and the
bit depth of samples in the file.

Video Browser
The Video Browser shows all of the video files in Max's search path. There are controls to filter by
name, and you can choose whether to view files as a list or by preview thumbnails.

427

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

With View by Preview enabled, video files will appear in a grid of video thumbnails. Hover over a
thumbnail to see the name of the file, and click on it to preview the video. Finally, use the size
controller above the thumbnails to adjust the size of the previews in the view.

Change the size of the previews to see more video files at once.

428

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Image Browser
The Image Browser shows all of the image files in Max's search path. Similar to the Video Browser,
there are controls to filter by name, and you can choose whether to view files as a list or by preview
thumbnails.

Snippet Browser
The Snippet Browser shows you all of the Snippets that Max has access to. Like the Video and
Image Browsers, there are controls to filter by name, and you can choose whether to view files as a
list or by preview thumbnails.

429

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Plug-ins Browser
The Plug-ins Browser shows you both VSTs and Audio Units plug-ins that Max has scanned, as well
as any Max for Live devices (AMXDs) in the search path. Use the Filter text entry to filter by name,
and the Recent tab so see plug-ins that you've used recently.

430

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Max for Live Browser
The Max for Live Browser is organized to make Max for Live device development easier by bringing
together objects, abstractions, and snippets for common tasks like handling MIDI, voice allocation,
and audio synthesis. The snippets and abstractions under Live API Browsers, Live API Snippets and
Live API Objects are especially useful, since these provide solutions to many of the common
programming challenges you'll run into when working with the Live API

431

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

One of the helpful snippets available in the Max for Live Browser

Module Browser
The Modules Browser presents snippets and abstractions from built-in and third party packages
that you've installed. It's a powerful way to package authors to give you quick access to the best of
what their tools are capable of. For example, the built-in BEAP package has categorized
abstractions related to audio analysis, effects, and quantization, all organized into modules.

432

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The BEAP compressor effect, loaded from the Modules Browser.

Collection Browser
The Collection Browser shows you all the collections that you've defined using the File Browser.
Collections give you total control over how your work is grouped, since a single collections can
contain any kind of resource, including video clips, text files, and JavaScript code. You can define
collections specific to a project or workflow, and use the Collections Browser to quickly access
resources in that collection.

433

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The built-in collection 'Sample Collection' demonstrates what a collection can do, and includes files of multiple
media types.

Top toolbar
The top toolbar contains various controls for changing the appearance of your patcher, along with
quick access to many of the user interface objects available in Max.

The Show Browser icon reveals the most recent Browser view in the Left Toolbar.

The Zoom Dropdown lets you adjust the level of zoom in your Max patcher. You can also adjust the
zoom level by pressing ⌘= (macOS) or CTRL= (Windows) to zoom in, and ⌘- (macOS)or CTRL(Windows) to zoom out.

The UI Object Palette gives you quick access to Max UI objects, organized by function. Click on
icons with a disclosure triangle to see a selection of options within that category.

434

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Format Palette button lets you adjust the style and appearance of objects in your patcher.

Finally, the calendar button lets you access the calendar. This can be extremely useful when you
want to know what patches you opened on a specific date.

435

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Right toolbar
The right toolbar lets you access the sidebar. Each button icon opens a different sidebar view. The
Search icon lets you access Max's search, which can help you find objects, reference
documentation, examples, and forum posts.

The Inspector icon will open the patcher and object inspector, which lets you view and edit the
configuration of the objects in your patcher.

436

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Reference Sidebar gives a quick summary of the function of the selected object, along the
messages and attributes that the selected object understands.

437

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Max Console displays errors and warnings, in addition to the output of any print objects.

The Snapshot editor lets you view and edit any snapshots belonging to the current patcher.

438

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Mapping button will be enabled if any objects in the current patcher support parameter
mapping. From the mapping editor, you can view and configure MIDI and Keyboard mappings.

You can use the Global Record button to quickly record the audio output of your patcher.

Above the volume control, the Audio CPU Meter tells you how much of your computer's processing
power you've used up with signal computation.

439

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

If you have a jit.world object in your patch, you can click on the Audio CPU Meter to toggle the FPS
Meter for your graphics context. This shows you the rate of graphics processing in frames per
second.

Finally, at the bottom of the right sidebar, the volume control lets you adjust the gain for any audio
generated from this patcher. Each patcher has its own gain control.

440

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Bottom toolbar
The bottom toolbar contains controls for changing how you interact with your patcher, including
enabling/disabling an alignment grid, turning on signal processing, and more. You can right click on
the bottom toolbar and select "Add Mute Audio" or "Add Solo Audio" to enable these optional icons.

From left to right, the first icon in the bottom toolbar controls Locking, letting you lock/unlock your
patcher.

If you're looking at an instance of an Abstraction, then the lock icon will change to a crayon.
Clicking this icon will let you modify the orignal patcher.

441

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Operate While Unlocked icon enables an interaction mode that lets you control UI objects in
your patcher, even while the patcher is unlocked.

The Patching Margin icon gives you a bit more room to work with, at the border of a patcher that
fills up the entire view.

Clicking the Presentation Mode icon will enable/disable presentation mode.

The Patcher Windows button lets you access different views of the current patcher. Click "New
View" to open a new window displaying the same contents as the current patcher. This can be
useful if you want to look at two different parts of a large patcher at once, or if you want to view a
patcher in presentation and patching mode at the same time. If you're looking at an instance of an

442

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Abstraction, the option "Open Original" will be enabled, and selecting this option will open the
original version of the abstraction. Finally, if you're looking at a subpatcher, the bottom of the menu
will let you navigate up the patcher hierarchy to a parent patcher.

Clicking the Show Objects Over Connections button toggles between displaying objects over patch
cords, or patch cords over objects.

The Show Grid button will let you enable and disable an alignment grid for your patcher. You can
control this same option by selecting Grid from the View menu, and this option works in conjunction
with Snap to Grid from the Arrange menu.

With some objects selected in your patcher, the Snippet button will let you save a new snippet from
your selection.

443

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The Enable Debugging button will toggle Debug Mode.

You can configure MIDI Mapping by clicking the MIDI Mapping icon.

And you can configure Keyboard Mapping by clicking the Keyboard Mapping icon.

When you hover over an object in your patcher, the Clue Bar will appear in the bottom toolbar. You
can configure the appearance and behavior of the Clue Bar using the Clues preference in the
Preference Window. If you click on the name of an object in the Clue Bar, Max will show you
additional information about that object.

444

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

You can set the @annotation attribute on an object to customize the text that
appears in the Clue Bar.

You can enable and disable the Global Transport with the Transport icon near the end of the bottom
toolbar.

If you enable the optional Mute and Solo icons, these will appear to the right side of the bottom
toolbar. These will let you silence audio in the current patcher, or silence all other non-soloed
patchers, respectively.

Finally, the Audio On/Off button in the right corner or the bottom toolbar will let you enable or
disable audio processing.

445

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

If you enable local audio processing by way of a dac~ object with @local 1 , or with the
startwindow message, the Audio On/Off button will glow orange instead of blue.

Max for Live Window
The Max patcher window will look slightly different when displaying a Max for Live device.

While in edit mode, the patcher will show a line indicating the vertical limit of the device. When
editing the device directly from Live by pressing the Edit buton, you cannot adjust the height of this
line. However, if you open the .amxd file in Max, you may adjust the position of this line. Changing
the position of this line will not affect the height of the device in Live.

446

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Toolbar changes
In the bottom toolbar, the Freeze Device button lets you Freeze and unfreeze your Max for Live
device.

The Show Containing Project button will reveal the Project that contains the Max for Live device. The
project is the place to configure properties of your Live device like whether it is an Audio Effect,
MIDI Effect, or a MIDI Instrument, among others.

Finally, the Preview button will let you enable/disable preview for the Max for Live device (this
button is only available when opening a device from Live by pushing the Edit button). With Preview
enabled, audio and MIDI will pass to and from Live, directly into your Max for Live device as you
edit it. With Preview disabled, audio and MIDI will bypass your device until you finish editing it.

Gen Window

447

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

The window for a Gen patcher has its own toolbar buttons as well. These let you access the special
objects supported in Gen, and give you control over when Gen compiles its code.

Toolbar changes (Gen)
In the left toolbar, the Gen Operators button gives you access to all of the operators supported in
Gen, sorted by category. This will display a different set of objects depending on whether the
patcher is a Gen DSP (gen and gen~ objects) or Gen Jitter (jit.gen, jit.pix, and jit.gl.pix) patcher.

The next button in the left toolbar will be titled either Gen DSP or Gen Jitter, again depending on
whether the patcher is a Gen DSP (gen and gen~ objects) or Gen Jitter (jit.gen, jit.pix, and jit.gl.pix)
patcher. This button lets you see built-in .gendsp and .genjit patchers, which are essentially
Abstractions that are restricted to the Gen domain. Many of these Gen Abstractions are helpful
starting points or useful building blocks.

448

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

In the bottom toolbar, the Enable Auto-Compile and Compile buttons let you decide when your
patcher compiles. With Auto-Compile enabled, your patcher will compile whenever you make a
change. If Auto-Compile is disabled, then you can press the Compile button to direct Gen to compile
your patcher whenever you're ready. Auto-Compile is enabled by default—disable it if you find that
your patcher is taking a long time to compile.

Finally, the Code button in the right toolbar lets you open the Code sidebar. This lets you examine
the Gen code that is generated from your patcher. If you want, you can copy-paste this into a Gen
codebox.

449

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

RNBO window
The RNBO window is very similar to the Gen window, which shouldn't be surprising given that both
generate code. The most important difference is the Export button in the right toolbar, which gives
you access to the Export Sidebar.

Toolbar changes (RNBO)
In the left toolbar, the RNBO Objects button will open a browser view for objects belonging to
RNBO. You can sort these by category and filter them by name.

450

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

Similar to Gen, RNBO patcher windows have Enable Auto-Compile and Compile buttons to let you
decide when your patcher compiles. With Auto-Compile enabled, your patcher will compile
whenever you make a change. If Auto-Compile is disabled, then you can press the Compile button to
direct RNBO to compile your patcher whenever you're ready. Auto-Compile is enabled by default—
disable it if you find that your patcher is taking a long time to compile.

If RNBO encounters an error while trying to compile your patcher, an error indicator will appear in
the bottom toolbar. Click on the indicator to display the generated source code, which will show on
which line the error occurred.

Finally, the Show Export Sidebar button in the right toolbar lets you show and hide the Export
Sidebar, from which you can export your RNBO patcher to any of its supported targets.

451

User Guide / Max Interface / Patcher Window and Toolbars

452

User Guide / MIDI

MIDI

453

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

Mapping
MIDI Mapping
MIDI Setup

454
455

Key Mapping

457

Deleting Maps
Editing Maps

457
458

Saving/Loading Maps

461

The Mappings system allows you to connect MIDI controllers and the computer keyboard directly
to user interface objects. If you've used custom MIDI mapping in a DAW or other program, the
concept should be familiar. Mapped parameter values can be changed directly from a MIDI
controller, without routing MIDI messages through Max objects.

Mapping uses object Parameters under the hood, so any Max object with a float, integer, or enum
parameter can be mapped. Detail on the individual mappings is provided in the ‘Show Mappings’
sidebar pane. Mappings are specific to individual patchers, and are not global Max preferences.
Mapping is also not available within the Max for Live context.

MIDI Mapping
Enable MIDI mapping by clicking the Assign MIDI Map button in the bottom toolbar.

The whole patcher view should get a purple border, and any MIDI-mappable objects will get a
purple hue as well. Objects that have Parameter Mode enabled will be solid purple and ready for
mapping. Objects that could have parameter mode enabled will have a dashed purple outline, and
you can click on these to enable MIDI mapping.

454

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

There's a shortcut to assign a MIDI map for any UI object: right-click on the object and
select Assign MIDI Map from the contextual menu.

Click on any mapping-ready object to focus it, then use any connected MIDI device to send a
control change or note message. You should see the value of the object change, and the top-right
corner of the object will show a solid blue box to indicate an active mapping. You can also open the
Mappings Sidebar to verify that your MIDI message was mapped to the object.

You can also shift focus between mapping-ready objects by hitting the tab key.

MIDI Setup

455

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

You can configure which MIDI ports participate in mapping using the MIDI Setup window. If the
value in the Map column is enabled, then Max will listen to MIDI messages from that port when in
MIDI mapping mode.

By default, Map is enabled for all MIDI inputs (for devices sending MIDI to Max) and disabled for all
MIDI outputs (where Max sends MIDI to an output port).

MIDI Output and Mapping
If you choose to enable Map for a MIDI output port, then any MIDI-mapped UI object will
automatically send MIDI control change or note events to that port. You don't need a midiout,
cltout, or noteout object. The specific controller number or note pitch that the UI object will send
depends on how the object is mapped.

As concerns MIDI output mapping, A subtle but potentially important consideration has to do with
what caused the object's value to change. Value changes produced by a MIDI or Key mapping will
send a final value at the completion of the event, after Max has finished processing the event.
However, value changes from other sources (clicking on a UI object, or sending it a message) will
produce events as they occur.

456

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

Key Mapping
Key mapping works similarly to MIDI mapping. Enable key mapping by pressing the Assign Key Map
button in the bottom toolbar.

The patcher view will get an orange border, and objects that support a key mapping will get an
orange hue. Just like for MIDI mapping, a dashed orange line means that you need to click on the
object to enable key mapping (by turning on Parameter mode for that object).

Deleting Maps

457

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

With MIDI or Key mapping active, select an object and press the delete key to remove the
mapping.
You can also delete the mapping using the Mappings Sidebar.

Editing Maps
View and edit all of the mappings in the current patcher by opening the Mappings Sidebar.

All of the mappings will be visible here, organized into MIDI and Keyboard tabs. You can customize
the behavior of each mapping by editing the row in the table corresponding to your that mapping.

458

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

Min, Max, Exponent, and Steps
These values change how the input, whether keyboard or MIDI, maps to the object parameter. The
values min and max refer to the min and max of the mapping itself, rather than the parameter, so
they can have any value between the minimum and maximum value of the parameter. If you set
min to a value greater than max , then the map will be inverted, with larger MIDI values

corresponding to smaller parameter values. The exponent value lets you adjust the curvature of
the mapping, giving you more fine-grained control towards the upper or lower end of the input
value. The steps value lets you divide the input value into discrete steps.

A Max parameter also has min, max, exponent, and steps, but these don't have to match
the values of min, max, exponent, and steps for the mapping. Your parameter could, for
example, have an exponent of 1, while the input mapping has an exponent of 3.

Relative Mode
Relative Mode affects the behavior of a mapped value when using an endless rotary encoder. If
you're mapping from a fixed-position knob or slider — common on most MIDI controllers — you
shouldn't need to change the relative mode. If you are using a controller like the Ableton Push,
which uses endless rotary encoders, one of the Relative Mode options should correspond to the
output of your device:

459

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

Mode

Description

Off

The controller sends absolute values, relative mode is off.

Push User / Arturia

Positive change is indicated by values > 0; negative change by values <=

REL 2

127. Zero (no change) is 0.

Arturia REL 1

Positive change is indicated by values > 64; negative change by values <=
63. Zero (no change) is 64.

Arturia REL 3

Positive change is indicated by values > 16; negative change by values <=
15. Zero (no change) is 16.

Trigger Mode
Trigger Mode sets the way the object will respond to trigger-like events. Note-on events and keydown events are trigger-like — Max will treat the note on/key down event as the start of the trigger,
and the note-off/key-up event as the end.

Mode

Description

Toggle

The value toggles between minimum and maximum.

Momentary Switch

The value stays at maximum until the event is completed.

Cycle

The value toggles between several options.

Bang

The object is treated as if it had received a bang message.

Pickup Mode

460

User Guide / MIDI / Mapping

Pickup mode changes the way the mapped object behaves when the MIDI controller gets out of
sync with the parameter value of the object. One way this could happen is if you click on a MIDImapped object to override its current value. In this case, pickup mode determines how the object
will handle new MIDI values, until the two get back in sync.

Mode

Description

Off

The received MIDI value is treated like an absolute value, and the object will jump to
the new value.

Pickup

The object will ignore incoming MIDI values until they cross over the current value of
the object.

Scale

Incoming MIDI values will scale the parameter value between its current value and the
minimum or maximum value, until the object reaches its minimum or maximum.

Saving/Loading Maps
Click on the Mappings Advanced Options button to reveal the Advanced options.

From here, click Save Mappings to File to save the current mapping configuration, and select Load
Mappings from File to restore

461

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

MIDI
MIDI Setup
Objects for MIDI

462
464

MIDI Ports and Devices

464

MPE

465

Default Devices for MIDI Objects
Configuring the Built-in MIDI Synthesizers

466
467

MIDI stands for Musical Instrument Digital Interface. It's a method for exchanging information
among compatible devices and programs. Originally created on top of a serial protocol, MIDI
messages are often sent entirely within a computer, either between applications or from an
application to a plug-in.

MIDI Setup
Choose MIDI Setup... from the Options menu to open the MIDI Setup Window.

462

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

The MIDI Setup window provides information on the availability and status of all available MIDI
inputs and outputs, and lets you perform mapping between MIDI devices and names or numbers.

Max can receive MIDI on any MIDI Input Port, and can send MIDI to any MIDI Output Port. These
ports have the following properties:

Name - The unique identifier for the port
Abbrev - An optional, single-letter abbreviation that acts as a shorthand for the port name.
Offset - An optional channel offset, in multiples of 16.
On - Whether or not the port is enabled
Map - Whether the port is available for mapping
Enabling/disabling MIDI ports
Toggle the checkbox in the On column to enable and disable MIDI port. All ports are enabled by
default.

Mapping mode
The checkbox in the Map column determines whether or not the given port is available for MIDI
Mapping. Mapping output is disabled by default, see MIDI Output and Mapping for more details.

Abbreviation and channel offset
Use the Abbrev and Offset columns to configure the abbrevation and channel offset for each MIDI
port. To create a letter mapping for a MIDI input or output, click in the Abbrev column for the row
corresponding to a MIDI input or output and choose a letter from the pop-up menu that appears.
The MIDI input or output device can now be identified using the letter abbreviation you have
selected.

Additionally, you can set a channel offset for each MIDI port. To create a channel offset for a MIDI
input or output, click in the Offset column for the row corresponding to a MIDI input or output and
choose a channel offset value from the pop-up menu that appears. The MIDI input or output device
can now be identified by sending or receiving a message whose MIDI channel number falls in the
range Offset Value + 15. For example, if you configure a MIDI port to have an offset of 32, then
setting the channel offset of 35 on a MIDI object will address that MIDI port on channel 3.

463

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

Objects for MIDI
The simplest objects for working with MIDI are midiin and midiout, which connect to a MIDI port
and route MIDI byte streams to or from those ports. The MIDI objects midiparse and midiformat
convert MIDI streams to and from Max messages. MIDI objects like notein/noteout,
bendin/bendout, ctlin/ctlout, polyin/polyout, and pgmin/pgmout combine the functionality of
midiin/midiout and midiparse/midiformat.

Basic objects for working with MIDI streams

Receive MIDI real-time messages with rtin. This includes MIDI start , stop , and tick messages.

To work with MIDI system-exclusive messages, use sysexin to receive sysex messages and
sysexformat to format them.

MIDI Ports and Devices
A MIDI Port is a named MIDI source or destination. Often, a MIDI Device, or a physical or virtual
system that can send or receive MIDI, will open a single MIDI port, whose identifier is simply the
name of the device. Because of this, you'll sometimes see port and device used interchangeably in
MIDI object help files.

464

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

MIDI sending and receiving objects all respond to the port message, which configures them to
bind to a particular MIDI port. The name of a MIDI port can also be an abbreviation, which can be
configured in the _MIDI Setup Window, or using the portabbrev message to Max. The midiinfo
object can list MIDI devices.

From left to right: a midiin object, bound to the port named 'to Max 1'; a midiin object bound to the port with the
abbreviation 'a'; a midiin object that will listen on all ports, with messages to select between ports.

MPE
MPE stands for MIDI Polyphonic Expression. The MPE specification assigns each voice its own
MIDI Channel, so that expression messages like pitch bend and aftertouch can be applied to
indivicual notes.

The mpeparse object will format an incoming MIDI stream into MPE message events, and the
corresponding mpeformat object will convert message events into an MPE-compatible midi stream.
The mpeconfig object will let you configure a MPE device, for example by defining zones. Finally,
the polymidiin object works in conjunction with the poly~ object, facilitating working with MPE in
the context of a polyphonic subpatch.

465

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

The last outlet of mpeparse formats the MIDI stream into 'mpeevent' messages, which are understood by a poly~
containing a polymidiin object.

Default Devices for MIDI Objects
If you create a MIDI output object without specifying a device name, the object transmits MIDI to
the first device (the default) in the list of output devices in the MIDI Setup window.

On the Macintosh, the default MIDI output is an AudioUnit DLS synthesizer. The AU DLS synth
supports its own set of internal sounds as a General MIDI bank, and also provides support for Level
2 SoundFont files.

On Windows systems, the default MIDI output is the Microsoft GS Wavetable Synthesizer. (Note:
the Microsoft GS Wavetable Synthesizer does not support SoundFont files)

If you don’t assign MIDI input or output to a specific destination or port (i.e., one that does not
have a MIDI device name or abbreviation as an argument) , Max will automatically merge all input
devices. This is useful if you want to treat all MIDI input identically regardless of its source, But this
also means that the only way for a Max patcher to determine which device is actually the source of
input to these objects is to compare the incoming MIDI channel number to the MIDI channel offset
specified for each device.

466

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

Note: The midiin object is an exception to this behavior — if you don’t use an argument
to specify a device, it receives data only from the first device in the input device list.
When multiple devices share the same letter abbreviation, Max will use the first one in
the list at the time a MIDI input or output object is created with that abbreviation as an
argument. Changing the abbreviations of devices has no effect on pre-existing objects,
although it will have an effect on the meaning of subsequent port messages sent to
MIDI output objects with abbreviations as argument.

Configuring the Built-in MIDI Synthesizers
Max uses your machine's built-in MIDI synthesizer as its default MIDI output destination. With the
OS-provided, built-in synthesizer, you can make sound without any external MIDI gear.

On Macintosh, the default MIDI output is the AudioUnit DLS (Down-Loadable-Sounds) synthesizer.
The AU DLS synth supports its own set of internal sounds as a General MIDI bank, and also
provides support for Level 2 SoundFont files.

On Windows systems, the default MIDI output is the Microsoft GS Wavetable Synthesizer.

On both systems, you can configure the built-in synthesizer by sending messages to Max directly.

Creating a new port for a DLS synth (Mac only)
Only one port for the built-in synth is created by default. (augraph on Mac OS X or midi_mme on
Windows). However, on Mac, you can work with more than one DLS synth by creating additional
MIDI synthesizer ports and assigning new DLS sound bank files to each one. This feature is not
available on Windows machines.

Use the createoutport message.
The name of the driver will be augraph on macOS. For the port name, you can use the
name you want to give to your virtual output port.

467

User Guide / MIDI / MIDI

For example, the message ;#SM createoutport synth2 augraph create a second DLS
synth called “synth2”.
Deleting a DLS synth port (Mac only)
Use the deleteoutport message.
Again, on macOS the name of the driver will be augraph . The port name will be the name
of the virtual port (created with createoutport ) that you want to delete.
Loading a bank of sounds on a DLS Synth (type 1 or 2) (macOS only)
Use the driver loadbank message.
The filename should be the name of an existing DLS bank file, and the port name will be the
name of the port that will use this bank. If you omit the port name, the bank you specify will
be loaded by all DLS ports. On macOS, the folder /Library/Audio/Sounds/Banks is
added to the search path when looking for a DLS bank file (i.e. it is the default location for
searching for sound bank files).
If you specify a zero (0) for the filename, the default GM (General MDI) sound bank will be
loaded (e.g., ;#SM driver loadbank 0 <portname>).
Turning the DLS synth reverb on and off (Mac only)
Use the driver reverb message.
Setting MIDI output latency (Windows only)
The Windows midi_mme will let you configure the output latency.
Use the message driver latency .
For example, the message ;#SM driver latency 10 midi_mme will set the driver latency
to 10 milliseconds.

468

User Guide / Parameters

Parameters

469

User Guide / Parameters / OpenSoundControl (OSC)

OpenSoundControl
osc.codebox
OSCQuery

471
471

The FullPacket Message

471

With OpenSoundControl (OSC) support, Max can be controlled by any OSC-compatible device or
application, and can also send OSC messages to control other OSC-enabled systems.

OSC can be enabled in Max in two ways:

1. Through the built-in UDP server, which you can activate for the whole application in Max's
preferences, or for a specific patcher using the patcher inspector.
2. By using the param.osc object.
Once enabled, parameters are automatically given OSC addresses, which have the following
structure:

/<patcher name>/param/<parameter name>/<attribute name>

The different components that make up the address are configurable globally and locally in each
patcher. Using these addresses, you can get and set the values of the following parameter
attributes:

Parameter

OSC

attribute

address

Raw Value

/raw

Description
The raw (scaled) value of the parameter. This address container is
optional if the raw value is the only value present in the OSC
bundle. See the OSC Value Mode attribute.

470

User Guide / Parameters / OpenSoundControl (OSC)

Normalized
Value

/normalized

The normalized ( [0,1] ) value of the parameter. This address
container is optional if the raw value is the only value present
in the OSC bundle. See the OSC Value Mode attribute.

osc.codebox
osc.codebox can be used to display the contents of an OSC packet using JSON syntax. It's worth
mentioning that OSC is a binary format--it has no human-readable form. The use of JSON syntax to
represent OSC should be considered an approximation of the underlying binary data.

OSCQuery
OSCQuery is a method of describing the capabilities of an OSC server. An http server can be
configured to serve OSCQuery requests in Max by enabling OSCQuery in the general preferences.

Once enabled, an OSCQuery request can be generated with a URL like http://localhost:30339 .
All patchers with parameters exposed as OSC will be present in the OSCQuery response. Individual
patchers can be excluded from the OSCQuery response using the option in the patcher inspector.

The FullPacket Message
Objects that accept and produce OSC do so using a message called FullPacket . This message is
passed with two arguments, and should be considered opaque, i.e. these arguments are not to be
manipulated as normal max values.

An important property of the FullPacket message is that it is transient and must not be
stored in objects like the message box, zl.reg, etc.

471

User Guide / Parameters / Connecting Parameters

Connecting Parameters
Supplier Objects

473

UI Objects

474

Establishing Connections
Visualizing Connections

474
475

Limitations

476

You can include an object called param in Gen and RNBO that declares a parameter. Gen and rnbo~
parameters can be changed as attributes of the object. If you wanted to link a live.dial to control a
gen~ parameter you would have to do the following:

copy the Gen parameter's min, max and default to the live.dial's parameter_range ,
parameter_inital , and parameter_initial_enable .

use getattr to listen to the value of the Gen parameter, then patch the live.dial to gen~ and
getattr using a set message to avoid creating a feedback loop and another message box to
prepend the attribute name to the value of the dial

Note that you have to copy this patching for every parameter you want to control.

472

User Guide / Parameters / Connecting Parameters

The param_connect attribute of many Max UI objects (including live.dial) provides a way to handle
all of this with one step, as demonstrated below. In this example, we will connect a live.dial to a
parameter inside gen~ called xyz .

Once this connection is established, the live.dial will control the xyz parameter inside gen~ and if
the xyz parameter's value changes in Gen, the live.dial will update to reflect the new value.
Furthermore, because the Gen parameter is linked to a live.dial, it can be automated in a Max for
Live device or used to for state management in pattrstorage or preset.

Supplier Objects
The list of suppliers—objects that define parameters connectable to UI objects via param_connect
will continue to expand over time. It currently includes:

Gen (gen~, gen, jit.gen, jit.gl.pix, and jit.pix as well as all the Gen codebox variants such as
gen.codebox~).
RNBO (rnbo~)
The ABL objects

473

User Guide / Parameters / Connecting Parameters

v8 with attributes defined via scripts that call declareattribute
poly~ objects that contain subpatchers with param objects. For more information, refer to
Polyphony.
jit.gl.slab (shader parameters)
Not all supplier objects will support every param_connect feature but all provide for bidirectional
control.

UI Objects
To verify if a UI object can be connected to a parameter, look in the Behavior category in the
Inspector. If the object is compatible, you'll see a Connect to Parameter attribute:

Generally, any UI object that is parameter-aware—in other words, an object with
parameter_enable attribute—will be able to connect to a supplier object. While some UI objects

such as multislider handle multiple values, only the first value will interact with a parameter of a
supplier.

Some non-UI objects—pattr for example—are also parameter-aware but they cannot connect to
parameters of supplier objects.

Establishing Connections
Connections to parameters are always established with the UI object you want to use for control
and display. There are three ways to establish a connection:

Use the Connect submenu of the Object Action Menu
Using the Inspector on the selected UI Object, choose the desired parameter from menu for
the Connect to Parameter attribute

474

User Guide / Parameters / Connecting Parameters

Send the message param_connect <path ID> to the UI object. To determine the path ID,
combine the scripting name of the supplier object with the parameter name separated by
double colons as follows: gen~_AB::xyz

To view the scripting name of an object, select the object and open the Inspector or choose Name...
from the Object menu.

Note that while multiple UI objects can be connected to the same parameter, a UI object can only
control a single parameter.

To disconnect a UI object from its parameter, choose None from the Connect submenu of the Object
Action Menu.

Visualizing Connections
To see the connected parameter for a UI object, hold down the Option / Alt key while the cursor is
over the object. A line will connect the UI object and supplier as shown below:

475

User Guide / Parameters / Connecting Parameters

You can also check the connection via the menu in Object Action Menu or Inspector. The menu
shows a check mark next to the connected parameter name.

Limitations
Connections between UI objects and supplier objects can only occur in the same patcher. If you put
the supplier object in a subpatcher (for example, via encapsulation), the connection will disappear.

Parameter connections are generally single-valued. Multi-valued parameter data and user interface
objects are not yet fully supported.

476

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Parameter Mode
Enabling Parameter Mode
Parameter Attributes

478
478

Initial Value

480

Parameter Names
Parameter Modulation

481
481

Parameter Data Types

483

Custom Unit Styles

484

Parameter Visibility
Parameter Window

484
486

Some Max objects can define a Parameter, which is a simple representation of the current state of
that object. Parameters define an interface between a Max patcher and some outside system for
the purpose of presetting, automation and modulation. In a Max for Live device, parameters can be
saved and recalled in the form of presets, and are exposed to Live Automation and Modulation.
Even outside of Live, parameters let you set the initial value of an object, and can be saved and
recalled by interacting with the pattr family of objects or Snapshots. They can also map to MIDI
events and the computer keyboard through Max's Mapping System.

This slider has enabled parameter mode, which creates a parameter 'Frequency' that can be controlled by a MIDI
message.

Most Max UI objects and Max for Live UI objects support Parameter Mode. The pattr and vst~
objects can also participate.

The Parameters Window shows all parameters currently associated with a patcher (or device), and
permits you to change parameter attributes in a single place. You can also change parameter
attributes for individual objects by using the Parameter tab of the Inspector.

477

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Enabling Parameter Mode
Many objects that support Parameter Mode will have an attribute @parameter_enable or
"Parameter Mode Enable". The Max for Live UI objects always have their parameter enabled, and
don't display that attribute.

The Parameter Mode Enable attribute

Activating Parameter Mode for an object will create a parameter for that object. The object owns
that parameter, and you can customize the behavior of the parameter through the parameterrelated attributes on that object. Enabling the Parameter Mode Enabled attribute will reveal all of the
parameter-related attributes in the Inspector.

Parameter Attributes
Name

Description

Visible to

When enabled, the parameter will be available for mapping to keyboard or

Mapping

MIDI input using Max Mapping

Order

Sets the order of recall of this parameter. Lower numbers are recalled first.
See Initial Value.

Link to Scripting

When enabled, the Scriping Name attribute is linked to the Long Name

Name

attribute. See Parameter Names.

Long Name

The internal, programmatic name of the parameter. Must be unique within
the patcher hierarchy. See Parameter Names.

478

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Short Name

The display name of the parameter, used in the user interface. See Parameter
Names.

Type

Type of the parameter. In general this will be Int (0-255), Float (32-bit float),
Enum, or Blob. Some parameter types are disabled for certain objects.

Range/Enum

The range of the parameter (for Int or Float) or the members of the
enumeration (for Enum types). Unsupported for Blob type parameters. See
Parameter Data Types.

Enumeration

Image files to be used in place of text on the Ableton Push controller, for

Icons

parameters with the Enum type.

Modulation

See Parameter Modulation

Mode
Modulation
Range

The Modulation Range of the parameter, if enabled.

Initial Enable

If enabled, the parameter will be set to an initial value when the patcher or
device is loaded. When you turn this on, the current value of the parameter is
stored as the initial value. See Initial Value.

Initial Value

The parameter's initial vlaue, if Initial Enable is enabled. See Initial Value.

Unit Style

Changes how the value of the parameter will be displayed. For example, the
Pan style will display negative numbers as panning left, positive numbers as
panning right, and zero as center pan.

Custom Units

The format string used to to display the parameter's value, if Custom is
selected for Unit Style. Accepts sprintf-style format strings. See Custom Units.

Exponent

Scales the exponential weight of the parameter's range. Values above 1 give
the parameter more fine grained control near the low end of the parameter's
range, while values between 0 and 1 give more fine grained control near the
top end.

Steps

The number of discrete steps between the minimum and maximum values of
the parameter's range. Values are inclusive, so steps 4 with a range 10 40
will have the possible values 10 , 20 , 30 , and 40 .

Update Limit

Limits the rate of updates when new values are triggered by automation.

(ms)

479

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Defer automation

When enabled, value updates that are triggered by automation are sent to

output

the back of the low priority queue.

Parameter

Determines whether parameters are hidden (to a host like Live), and

Visibility

whether their values are automatable. See Parameter Visibility.

Initial Value
With Parameter Mode enabled, you can turn on the "Initial Enabled" attribute in order to set an
initial value for the object. The object will restore this value when the patcher loads, as well as
sending this value to any connected objects. For Live UI objects, you can also double-click on the
object to restore its initial value. The "Order" attibute affects the order in which parameter-enabled
objects are initialized. Objects with a lower value for their "Order" attribute will be initialized first.

Attributes related to parameter initialization

Reinitialize
Select Reinitialize from the Edit menu to set all parameters in the current patch to their Initial Value.
See the patching guide for more information.

480

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Parameter Names
Parameter-enabled objects have three names associated with them: a Scripting Name, a Short
Name, and a Long Name. The Long Name and Short Name attributes only affect the display of Live
UI objects, and the visible name of the parameter when working in Live.

Scripting Name: The name of the object as it appears to Max, this is a unique identifier that
can be used to refer the object when you're scripting or using pattr. Must be unique to the
patcher.
Long Name: The name of the parameter attached to the object. If you set up MIDI or
Keyboard Mapping for the parameter, this is the name that you'll see in the Mappings
Sidebar. It is also how the parameter will appear in Live. Must be unique to the entire
patcher hierarchy.
Short Name: The display name of the parameter. This affects the display of Live UI objects
like live.slider and live.dial, which have a visible text label.

Parameter Modulation
The "Modulation Mode" and "Modulation Range" attributes determine how Modulation from Live
affects the value of the parameter (for more about Modulation, see Live's documentation). When
the parameter is modulated, the modulation value is combined with the current value of the
parameter and scaled by the modulation range to determine its final value.

Unipolar
Modulation is between 100% and 0%. At 100%, the parameter isn't modulated at all. At 0%, the
parameter takes on its minimum modulation value value.

481

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Unipolar Modulation
0%

100%

Mod Range
Parameter Value

Unipolar modulation mode

Bipolar
Modulation is between -50% and 50%. The range of modulation depends on the current value of
the parameter. The range shrinks as the parameter approaches its minimum or maximum value, so
that even as it modulates it never exceeds those values.

Bipolar Modulation
-50%

50%

Mod Range
Parameter Value

Bipolar modulation mode. Notice that the range of the modulation is squished to 27 units on either side, so that
the value after modulation never exceeds the maximum of 127.

Additive
Additive modulation is the same as Bipolar, except the range of modulation never changes. Instead,
modulation that would cause the parameter value to exceed its minimum or maximum value instead
clips to that value.

482

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Additive Modulation
-50%

50%

clip
Parameter Value

Additive modulation mode.

Absolute
Absolute modulation is not based on a percentage but rather the units of the parameter. No matter
the range of the parameter, a modulation by 10 absolute units will always modulate by the same
amount. Absolute modulation cannot be negative.

Absolute Modulation
+0st

+10st

+20st

+30st

Parameter Value

Absolute modulation mode

Parameter Data Types
The Data Type of a Max Parameter determines the internal storage format for the data.

Float: Can take on any value, including floating-point values, and can participate in
Modulation from Live. The default storage type, and perfect for most applications.
Int: Can represent 256 distinct values, with a default range 0 to 255.
Enum: A list of items with user-configurable names. Cannot be modulated (but can be

483

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

automated).
Blob: Parameters that cannot be automated or modulated, but can be stored in presets.
These non-automatable parameters may be any type of data you can store with a pattr
object: single values, lists, dictionaries, arrays or symbols.

The Data Type only affects the internal storage format of the parameter, and does not
change how the parameter's value is displayed. A parameter with the "Data Type" Int
and the "Unit Style" Float will appear to be a decimal number, even though the value
after the decimal will always be zero. Similarly, a parameter with the "Data Type"
Float and the "Unit Style" Int will still display as if it were a whole number. In fact,
this is the way to have a parameter with more than 256 values that still appears to be a
whole number.

Custom Unit Styles
The "Unit Style" attribute lets you change the units associated with your parameter, which for some
objects will affect the way the value is displayed.

Millisecond, decibel, and pan unit styles

If you like, you can define your own custom Unit Style. Select Custom as the value for the "Unit
Style" attribute. The "Custom Units" attribute now lets you create your own units to follow the
parameter value. You can use C-style format strings here, so %0.2f Bogon(s) would cause a
parameter value of 15.5678 to display as 15.56 Bogon(s) .

Parameter Visibility

484

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

The Parameter Visibility attribute determines how a parameter is exposed to Ableton Live when your
device loads. It affects:

Automation: Whether the parameter is available to Live's automation system
Stored: Whether the parameter is saved in a Live Set, included in Live Presets, and recorded
in Live's undo history
Visible: Whether control surfaces (e.g., Push) can access the parameter
Type: Whether the parameter supports multi-value data (e.g., multislider or dictionary) or is
restricted to single values (int, float, enum)
Mode
Automated and Stored
Stored Only
Visible
Visible (Not Stored)
Hidden

Automation

✅
❌
❌
❌
❌

Stored

✅
✅
✅
❌
❌

Visible

✅
❌
✅
✅
❌

Type
int, float, enum
multi-value
int, float, enum
int, float, enum
multi-value

Automated and Stored: This is what you want most of the time for most parameters, for any
value that you want to be able to automate in Live's Automation View. Only single-value
parameters (int, float, enum) can be automated.
Stored Only: Use for parameters that are part of the device’s persistent state but should not
be automated or exposed to control surfaces. Typical examples include UI state (e.g., which
tab is selected). This mode may include multi-value data (e.g., multislider or dictionary).
Visible: Similar to Stored Only, but exposed to control surfaces such as Push. Suitable for
mode selectors or simple state controls (e.g., filter type, show/hide a UI panel, apply a
temporary gain offset). With this option enabled, you can use the Undo When Visible
attribute to exclude the parameter from Live's Undo system. This mode is limited to singlevalue parameters (int, float, enum).
Visible (Not Stored): Same as Visible, but not saved or included in preset storage. With this
option enabled, you can use the Undo When Visible attribute to exclude the parameter from
Live's Undo system. Suitable for momentary or transient controls (e.g., pad-triggered
actions).

485

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Hidden: For internal parameters that use Parameter Mode for behavior or notifications but
should not be exposed to Live or control surfaces. Not stored in the Live Set or presets, not
visible to control surfaces, and not recorded in Live’s undo history. Effectively equivalent to
a standard Max object with Parameter Mode enabled.

If a parameter primarily exists to drive or modulate other parameters, consider setting it
to Hidden. This can reduce pressure on Live’s undo buffer and avoid unintended preset
storage interactions.

Parameter Window
From the View menu, select Parameters to open the Parameter Window (this option will be disabled
if your patcher does not contain any parameter-enabled objects). This window lists every parameter
in the given patcher hierarchy.

Updating parameters from the list
Because the Parameter Window lists all parameters in your patcher, it's a convenient place to
change the name, range, initial value, and many other attributes of parameters in your patcher,
without you needing to find the specific object that owns the parameter. Double-click on any cell in
the parameter table to update the corresponding value for that parameter.

Filtering and ordering parameters
In the top-right of the window, the Filter Field lets you filter parameters by name. For example,
typing "freq" into this field would show only parameters whose names contained the text string

486

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

"freq".

Along the top of the parameter list, the table headers identify the kind of information displayed in
each column. Click on a table header to sort parameters by the values in that column. Click again on
the same header to toggle between an ascending and descending order. You can also drag on these
column headers to reorder them.

Customizing column headers
Right click on any column header to bring up a customization menu for column headers.

The commands "Auto-size this column" and "Auto-size all columns" will shrink the width of the
column or columns to fit the text in the respective column.

Below these, the other menu options let you customize which columns will appear in the parameter
list. Some columns have abbreviated names, for example the list option "I" refers to the parameter
attribute "Initial Enable". You can hover over the header of any column to see the full name of that
header, even if the title is abbreviated.

487

User Guide / Parameters / Parameter Mode

Finding parameter objects
When you click to select a row in the parameter table, the object that owns that parameter will get
a yellow highlight. You can also click the blue "P" button in that parameter's row and select "Reveal
in Patcher" to show the same yellow highlight.

488

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

Presets and Interpolation
Storing and Recalling Values
Interpolating Between Two Presets

489
492

Multi-Preset Interpolation

493

Non-Interpolating User Interfaces

494

Interpolation User Interfaces
See Also

495
495

A preset is a set of values of one or more objects in your patcher you have stored for later recall.
Max has two objects, preset and pattrstorage, whose primary purpose is storing and recalling these
sets of values. You can use other objects for this purpose, including table, coll, and dict, but preset
and pattrstorage have two principal advantages:

they can store and recall the state of objects without patch cord connections
they offer the ability to interpolate between two or more preset states

Storing and Recalling Values
The preset Object
The preset object is an easy-to-use way to capture the state of user interface objects. The preset
object is itself a user interface object. Each square in its grid represents a different preset.

In the example below, shift-clicking on any square in the preset will capture the current state of all
the user interface objects in the patcher -- the dial, slider, and number box. Clicking on the square
(without holding down the shift key) will recall the stored state asociated with the sequare (and
draw that square to indicate it's current).

489

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

Any preset data you store will be saved in the patcher file containing the preset object.

The pattrstorage Object
The pattrstorage object has many features and operating modes that go far beyond what preset is
capable of doing. In this brief introduction, we'll discuss how to use pattrstorage in a manner
roughly similar to preset.

The name pattrstorage comes from its role in storing the values of pattr objects. "Pattr" is short for
patcher attributes and is an object that creates a single named storage location. While preset stores
the values of user interface objects directly, pattrstorage needs a pattr object before it will store
anything. Conveniently, it's not necessary to make pattr objects explicitly to store the values of user
interface objects. Instead, two things are required:

ensure each object whose value you want to store has a scripting name -- this will be true
for objects such as live.dial that default to parameter mode on but not for toggle, dial or
other UI objects that do not enable parameter mode by default. (Parameter mode itself is
not required to use pattrstorage, just the scripting name.)
add an autopattr object to your patcher.
The autopattr will ensure every user interface object with a scripting name has a hidden pattr to go
with it.

490

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

If you double-click on the pattrstorage object, you'll see all of the pattr slots and their current
values.

To store a preset with the current values managed by pattrstorage, send the message store followed
by a slot number starting at 1.

491

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

Send that same number back to recall to pattrstorage to recall the preset. (The preset object
accepts the same messages.)

To see the contents of all your presets, you can open the storage window by sending the message
storagewindow to pattrstorage.

Saving pattrstorage data in a file offers more options than preset. The default option is to prompt
you to save any newly stored data in a separate file when you close the parent patcher. You can
read this data file back into pattrstorage using the read message.

Interpolating Between Two Presets
Both preset and pattrstorage offer the ability to interpolate between two adjacent presets.
Interpolation is an operation that produces a value in between two values. In both objects, you use
a float value between two storage slots to specify where in the distance between the slots you
want the resulting values.

Here's a simple example with a single object. Suppose the value of a slider for preset 1 is 0 and 1 for
preset 2. An float value 1.5 sent to preset or pattrstorage will produce an output value halfway
between the two presets, resulting in a value of 0.5 (which is half way between 0 and 1). A float
value of 1.9 will produce a value closer to preset 2 than preset 1 -- in this case the slider will be set
to 0.9.

492

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

When you interpolate between two presets with the preset object, the display of the active slot will
show the relative contribution of each of the two slots. The display can help you keep in mind that a
value of 1.7 does not mean preset 1 contributes 70% to the value; in fact, just the opposite. The
interpolation calculation is based on the distance between the value and the whole number. The
farther away the float value is from the whole number, the less that preset slot will contribute to
the final interpolated outcome. And the closer the float value is to a whole number, the more that
preset slot will contribute. Thus 1.99 will be 99% preset 2 and 1% preset 1.

While preset is limited to linear interpolation, pattrstorage offers several other interpolation curves
and behaviors via its interp message.

Multi-Preset Interpolation
Both preset and pattstorage offer the ability to interpolate using the data in several preset slots
with the recallmulti message. Multi-preset interpolation is based on a list of weights, where the
integer part of the value is the preset slot number and the decimal part is the relative weight of the
preset contributing to the outcome. Weights are normalized so they don't have to add up to 1.
Here's an example using the preset object below where we want to use preset slots 1, 4, and 7.

recallmulti 1.5 4.5 7.5 will weigh each preset slot equally. So will
recallmulti 1.2 4.2 7.2 . recallmulti 1.8 4.0 7.2 will be 80% preset 1 and 20% 7, with

nothiing from preset 4.

As with two-preset interpolation, the preset object will display the weights for the most recent
recallmulti message.

493

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

Non-Interpolating User Interfaces
preset As a Front End for pattrstorage
You can use a preset as a front-end for storage and recall of presets in pattrstorage. Give
pattrstorage a name with its first argument, then set the pattrstorage attribute of preset to this
name. After doing this, shift-clicking on a slot in preset actually stores a preset at the same slot in
pattstorage, and clicking on a slot in preset recalls the corresponding slot in pattrstorage.

umenu and chooser As a Front End for preset
To display presets in a list format rather than the grid of the preset object, connect a umenu or
chooser to the left inlet of preset. The contents of the umenu and chooser will be kept in sync with
the storage state and most-recently recalled slot of preset. You can also display names for each
preset slot by appending an optional name to the store message. store 2 Cyclical will name
the new preset Cyclical . You can see the name when moving the cursor over the stored slot in
preset or, if you have a connected umenu or chooser it will show up in the item text.

494

User Guide / Parameters / Presets and Interpolation

Interpolation User Interfaces
The nodes object is ideal for multi-preset interpolation with either preset or pattrstorage.
Connecting nodes to the inlet of preset creates a visual "node" for each stored preset up to a
maximum set by the Max Dynamic Nodes ( maxdynamicnodes ) attribute, which defaults to 8.
Dragging the mouse over nodes performs multi-preset interpolation.

Using nodes with pattrstorage requires more work including manually creating the set of nodes that
will correspond to the preset slots you want to interpolate and some patching logic to translate the
values coming out of nodes to the correct values for the recallmulti message. An example is
found in the pattrstorage tab of the nodes object help file.

See Also
Snapshots

495

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

Saving State with pattr
Saving State with pattr

496

Quickstart

497

Parameters and pattr

497

Including Objects in pattrstorage
Binding Objects to pattr

499
500

Working with preset

500

Paths, Hierarchy and pattrhub
Managing Storage

501
502

Usage with Max for Live Devices

504

When you save a patcher to a .maxpat document, you save its structure but not the state of
objects in that patcher. The pattr object, along with object like autopattr, pattrstorage, pattrforward,
and pattrhub, lets you save and recall the state of a patcher, or a subset of objects within the
patcher.

Saving State with pattr
Unlike some applications, Max does not save the state of a patcher along with its structure. When
you save a patcher normally, you're saving the names of all the objects, their connections, their
arguments, and their frozen attributes. However, the state of the patcher—the value of all your
sliders, the contents of your number boxes—is not usually saved. The pattr object family is
responsible for helping with saving the state of a patcher.

We can maintain sets of data from objects throughout a Max patcher hierarchy. For
example, with pattr you can control the state of objects inside of patcher and bpatcher
objects all from the top level of the patcher.
We can use pattr objects to remotely set and query the state of objects controlled by the
pattr system from anywhere within the patcher.
The pattr objects store groups of settings as JSON or XML files, allowing us to easily read
and edit saved data outside of Max.

496

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

The pattr objects can recall the state of objects in a specific order, avoiding difficulties with,
for example, the recalling of a toggle object that starts a process before all the variables are
in place for the process to function correctly.
Not only can we store the states of many objects under a single address, we can also
interpolate between these states, allowing for a seamless crossfade between multiple
settings.
The pattr objects feature a high-level interface for viewing and managing the current state
of controlled objects and the states that have been saved.

Quickstart
The simplest way to save the state of your patcher using pattr is to add an autopattr object and a
pattrstorage object to your patcher. With autopattr, objects that have a scripting name will be
added to pattrstorage automatically. Now store the state of your patcher by sending pattrstorage
the message store 1 . If pattrstorage has the attribute @savemode 2 , then when you save your
patcher, pattrstorage will save the state of your patcher to a JSON file. When you open your
patcher, if Max can locate that JSON file, pattrstorage will load it automatically, and you can send
pattrstorage the message recall 1 to reload the state of your patcher.

Simple setup to save the state of a patch

Parameters and pattr

497

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

Any object whose internal state can be represented as a parameter can be stored in the pattr
system. This includes most UI objects (slider, multislider, nodes), along with any object with the
@parameter_enable attribute. Also, dictionaries, strings, and arrays can be included in the pattr
system.

An array, string, and dictionary, all stored in pattr

The pattr object itself can either be bound or unbound. When bound to an object, via either its
middle outlet or the @bindto attribute, pattr simply references the internal state of the bound
object. If pattr is unbound, then it instead manages its own, internal state.

498

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

The pattr 'var1' is bound to the slider. Changing the state of the slider updates the data stored in 'var1', but the
data is stored under the key 'var1'. The data in 'var2' is managed internally by the other pattr object, and is not
bound to any object.

Complex internal state can be represented as a parameter, so even objects like live.grid can be
included in the pattr system and saved to pattrstorage. However, some objects cannot. For
example, the contents of a jit.matrix or buffer~ cannot be stored with pattr.

Including Objects in pattrstorage
In order to save the state of an object, it must be included in the pattr system.

1. All pattr objects are included in the pattr system automatically. Both bound and unbound
pattr objects will be addressable via pattrhub and saved with pattrstorage.
2. Any object with a scripting name ( @varname attribute) will be included in the pattr system
if it's in a patcher with an autopattr object. If autopattr has the attribute @autoname 1 , it
will automatically give all valid objects a scripting name.
3. Any object connected to the left outlet of autopattr.

499

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

The autopattr object will also collect the state of plugins included with vst~ or amxd~.
See the autopattr help file for more.

Binding Objects to pattr
Bind a pattr object to pattr-compatible object either using the @bindto attribute, or using the
middle outlet of pattr. Only one object may be bound to a given pattr at a time.

The pattr 'var1' is bound to the number box with @varname special. The pattr 'var2' is bound to another number
box using its middle outlet. Finally, the pattr 'var3' tried to bind to two object, which caused an error message.

Automatic Naming
Like many named entities in Max, every pattr object must have a name. If you don't give it a name,
Max will assign one automatically. Also, every object that pattr binds to must itself have a name. If
you bind a pattr to an object without a name, Max will assign a unique @varname automatically.

Working with preset
The preset object can be used as an interface to the pattrstorage object. Set the @pattrstorage
attribute of a preset object to turn that object into a visual representation of the pattrstorage
object. Each preset slot in the preset object represents a different storage slot in the pattrstorage
object. Use preset to create, update, and delete presets normally, and the state of the pattrstorage
object will update automatically.

500

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

Paths, Hierarchy and pattrhub
The pattrhub object can forward messages to any object in the pattr system. That includes pattr
objects, as well as any object included in the pattr system with autopattr. If a pattr object has the
name "var1", send a message like var1 10 to pattrhub to send a message 10 to the pattr object
"var1".

Using pattrhub to send messages to objects in the pattr system, including a pattr object as well as a number box
with a scripting name.

Other patchers and pattrmarker
In typical usage, a pattr system is linked to a single patcher hierarchy. If you have two distinct root
patchers, then each will have a completely independent pattr system.

501

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

However, you can use the pattrmarker object to give a root patcher a global name that can be
referenced from anywhere in pattr. If your root patcher contains a pattrmarker object with the text
pattrmarker earth , then you can send messages to objects in that patcher by using the path
prefix ::earth . See the pattrmarker help file for details.

Managing Storage
Similar to the preset object, store the state of pattrstorage by sending it a message like store 1 to
store the current state in slot 1. Recall a given state by sending it a message like recall 1 to recall
the data in slot 1. A floating-point value for recall, like 1.5, will interpolate between two stored
slots. The interpolation curve and other parameters can be configured, see the pattrstorage help file
for details.

Saving and loading pattr data
Send pattrstorage the write message to save its contents to a JSON file. Later, use the read
message to load the contents of a saved pattrstorage data file.

When you open a Max patcher containing a pattrstorage object, it will try to
automatically load data from it's JSON file. The name of a pattrstorage object is
important if you want this automatic loading to work, since Max will look up the data
file using the same name as the pattrstorage object.

502

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

Because the pattrstorage object is named 'mydata', Max will look for the file 'mydata.json' to initialize pattrstorage
when the patcher loads.

Saving pattrstorage data can be automated somewhat. If you set the @savemode attribute to
something other than 0, Max will prompt you to save the contents of your pattrstorage.

@savemode

Description

0 (no autosave or prompt)

Never save automatically or ask to save

1 (prompt to save when
object is freed)

When you delete a pattrstorage object, or when the patcher that
contains it gets freed or deleted, prompt the user to save. This
keeps you from accidentally losing data held in pattrstorage.

2 (attempt autosave
when patcher is saved

When you save the patcher, pattrstorage will try to save to the
same place as it saved last time. If it can't, it will prompt the user to

else prompt)

save.

3 (attempt autosave
when patcher is closed

When you close the patcher, pattrstorage will try to save to the
same place as it saved last time. If it can't, it will prompt the user to

else prompt)

save.

503

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

Multiple pattrstorage objects
Generally you'll only have one pattrstorage object per patcher. However, using the attribute value
@subscribemode 1 , you can explicitly assign objects to pattrstorage with the subscribe

message.

Use the subscribe message to assign objects to pattrstorage.

Usage with Max for Live Devices
Live-specific user interface objects such as live.dial save their state within Live documents and
presets. Standard Max objects will not. If you want to use standard Max objects and have Live save
their state, you'll have to attach those objects to a pattr object with @parameter_enable enabled.
The "Parameter Visibility" attribute must also be set to "Automated and Stored" or "Stored Only".

504

User Guide / Parameters / Saving State with pattr

Because this Max dial is bound to a pattr with @parameter_enable 1, its state will be saved with Live and included
in Live presets.

There are some other important differences to keep in mind when building a Max for Live device
with pattr objects:

The autopattr object does not work with Max for Live's parameter system. It will not work
with Live's parameter system, so objects that are attached to an autopattr will not be seen
by Live. If you want a pattr parameter to appear for modulation etc, you will need to add a
pattr object for each instance.
The pattrstorage object mostly works the same in Max for Live, but there are a few
important distinctions to keep in mind, if the object is in Parameter Mode.
The value of the pattrstorage object in Parameter Mode is its entire storage state
(what is ordinarily saved to an external file), rather than the currently recalled slot.
This means that Live can save the contents of pattrstorage in the Live set itself,
eliminating the need for a separate JSON or XML file. Use of an external file can be
disabled by setting @savemode to 0.
If the pattrstorage object has an Initial Value (Initial Enable is turned on in the
Inspector), the @savemode and @autorestore attributes are ignored and file-less
use of the object is assumed.
The pattrstorage object has an additional attribute when in Parameter Mode: Autoupdate Parameter Initial Value. When this is enabled and Initial Enable is turned on,
all changes to the object's storage state will cause the Initial Value to auto-update to
the new state.

505

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

Snapshots
Patcher Snapshots

506

Effects Snapshots
Managing Snapshots

508
509

Embedding Snapshots

513

Usage with pattr

514

Snapshot-enabled Messages
JavaScript Snapshot API

514
515

Snapshots let you save the state of parameters in your patcher. They are similar to the pattr system,
but with some key differences:

Snapshots can be embedded with a patcher, and do not need to be saved as a separate
JSON file.
There is no built-in mechanism to interpolate between snapshots.
Snapshots are global, containing all of the parameters in a given patcher, plugin, or device.
You can give snapshot slots a name
In general, snapshots give you less granular control than working with pattr, but require less
configuration to work. Snapshots were designed with a few particular use cases in mind:

Saving and restoring the state of all parameter-enabled objects in a patch
Saving and restoring the state of a VST or Audio Unit plugin, or a Max for Live Device
Saving and restoring the state of a rnbo~ object.
Snapshots use the Parameter system to determine what to save; you will need to set the Parameter
mode enable for each UI object whose state you wish to save.

Patcher Snapshots

506

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

A patcher snaphot contains the state of all parameters in a patcher hierarchy. Since snapshots work
with the parameter system, an object must have parameter mode enabled in order to be saved in a
snapshot.

If you're unable to create new patcher snapshots, it might be because there are no
parameter-enabled objects. Snapshots will only be enabled if there is at least one
parameter-enabled object in your patcher. You can enable parameter mode on most UI
objects from the inspector.

Here at the top of the Snapshots sidebar view, you can see the text "patcher snapshots", indicating
that these are snapshots that belong to the patcher itself. With nothing selected, the Snapshots
sidebar view will display patcher snapshots. If you select a vst~, rnbo~, or amxd~ object, you'll see
that the sidebar view updates to display snapshots for that object.

Patcher snapshots are saved and recalled at the top-level of a patcher hierarchy, but will save
subpatcher parameters.

507

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

Subpatches can't have snapshots separate from the root patcher. If you need this kind
of behavior, you can create a Max for Live device and host it in a patcher with the
amxd~ object.

Effects Snapshots
Effects snapshots store the parameter states of plugins, Max for Live devices, or RNBO devices
hosted by vst~, amxd~, or rnbo~ objects.

When you select one of these objects in your patcher window, the snapshots pane will display any
snapshots associated with they selected device.

Unlike patcher snaphsots, which are always saved with the patcher, effects snapshots are not
embedded by default. Instead, they are saved in the Max 9 Folder in a folder called Snapshots. This
means that when you create a snapshot for a VST, Audio Unit, or Max for Live Device, it's available
throughout Max, no matter where it was created. See embedding snapshots for more.

If you want to share a snapshot that you created, you can share the associated snapshot
file located in the Max 9 Folder. You can also use Max projects to automatically collect
snapshot dependencies, which may make sharing snapshots easier.

508

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

The header/title bar for vst~ and amxd~ objects lets you create and recall new snapshots when the
patcher window is locked. The camera icon creates snapshots, and the circular icon to the right will
recall snapshots.

Managing Snapshots
To view, create, load, rename, and delete snapshots, open the Snapshots sidebar view by clicking the
Show Snapshots icon in the right toolbar.

509

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

All of the following snapshot options are also available by right-clicking on any
snapshot.

Creating Snapshots
To create a new snapshot, click on the Add a new Snapshot button in the bottom of the Snapshots
sidebar view.

510

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

Recalling Snapshots
Recall a snapshot by either clicking on the triangle next to a snapshot, or by clicking on the Restore
Snapshot icon in the bottom toolbar.

511

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

Renaming Snapshots
Rename a snapshot either by double-clicking on the name of a snapshot, or by clicking on the
Rename Snapshot icon in the bottom toolbar.

Modifying Snapshots
You can modify a snapshot by clicking the Take Snapshot button in the bottom toolbar. This will
overwrite the currently selected snapshot with the current parameter values of the selected patcher
or, device, or plugin.

512

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

Deleting Snapshots
Delete a snapshot by clicking the Delete the selected Snapshot icon in the bottom toolbar.

Embedding Snapshots
Patcher snapshots are always embedded with the patcher, but snapshots for plugins, amxds, and
RNBO devices are not. Click on the circle icon next to any snapshot to embed it with the current
patcher.

513

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

Whether they are embedded or not, snapshots are always saved in the Snapshots folder in the Max
9 Folder. These snapshot files are named according to the name of the current patcher, so it's good
practice to name your patcher file prior to creating snapshots.

Usage with Projects
When you use a vst~, amxd~, or rnbo~ object as part of a Max Project, any snapshots of that object
become dependencies of the project. When you consolidate your project, those snapshots will be
copied to the project directory. This lets you share your project with others, including any snapshots
that the project might depend on.

Usage with pattr
Snapshots can be easily integrated into your pattr workflow. Using a pattrstorage object along with
pattr objects or an autopattr object, the internal state of your VST, AU or AMXD can be recalled.

See the pattr and autopattr help files for example usage (under the "snapshots" tab).

Snapshot-enabled Messages
All snapshot-enabled objects (amxd~, vst~, rnbo~, and thispatcher) understand the messages:

snapshot [userpath (optional)] [index (optional)] [name (optional)]
restore [index (optional)]

514

User Guide / Parameters / Snapshots

addsnapshot [userpath (optional)] [index (optional)] [name - (optional)]
deletesnapshot [index]
setsnapshotname [index] [name]
deletesnapshot [index]
setembedsnapshot [index] [embedstate]
movesnapshot [srcindex] [dstindex]
exportsnapshot [srcindex] [userpath]
importsnapshot [dstindex] [userpath]

JavaScript Snapshot API
For advanced users and those creating standalone patchers, Snapshots can be accessed via the
Snapshots API. See the JavaScript Snapshot API for more information.

515

User Guide / Patching

Patching

516

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Conversion Cheat Sheet
Message to Audio

517

Audio to Message
Signal to Event

518
519

Unit Conversions

520

Multichannel
List to buffer~

522
523

buffer~ to List

524

Audio to Matrix

524

Matrix to Audio
Matrix to Texture

526
527

Texture to Matrix

527

Matrix to Messages
Message to Matrix

528
529

Matrix Upsampling/Downsampling

530

Matrix Color Conversion

531

Thread Priority Conversion
Dictionaries

532
533

Number Formats

534

String to Array
Array to String

536
536

buffer~ to Array

536

Array to buffer~

537

Array to buffer~ (multiple channels)

537

Message to Audio

517

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Convert a message to a signal without any smoothing

Convert a message to a signal with linear smoothing

Convert a message to a signal with logarithmic smoothing

Audio to Message

518

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Convert audio to a stream of messages

Analyze an audio stream for peaks, average, or RMS

Signal to Event

519

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Signal to Event

Unit Conversions

Samples to Milliseconds

Frequency to MIDI Pitch

Amplitude to Decibel

520

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Note Value to Millisecond

See Time Value Syntax for more details.

Tempo to Millisecond

This same patch will convert milliseconds to tempo (kinda cool huh?)

521

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Linear to Quadratic

Multichannel

Single channel to multichannel

Multichannel to separate channels

522

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Multichannel to stereo mixdown

List to buffer~

Fill using peek~

Fill using jit.buffer~

523

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

buffer~ to List

Using peek~ and zl.group

Using jit.buffer~ and jit.spill

Audio to Matrix

524

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Filling up a matrix

Reading from a buffer

525

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Writing into a matrix

Matrix to Audio

Scanning a matrix

526

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Read a video as an audio signal

Matrix to Texture

Convert a matrix to a texture. It really is that simple.

Texture to Matrix

527

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Convert a texture to a matrix

Matrix to Messages

Get cell values from a matrix as a list

Read a specific cell from a matrix

528

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Get a representative number from a matrix

Output the cells of a matrix one by one

Message to Matrix

529

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Fill up a matrix using a list

Set a single cell in a matrix

Matrix Upsampling/Downsampling

530

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Downsample a matrix, no interpolation

Upsample a matrix with interpolation

Matrix Color Conversion

531

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Red-Green-Blue to Hue-Saturation-Lightness

Red-Green-Blue to Luminance

More color space conversions

Thread Priority Conversion

Move a high-priority message to the low priority queue

532

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Move a low-priority message to the high-priority scheduler

Note that this won't make the message get processed "sooner", but if you know what
you're doing there may be situations where it's useful.

Dictionaries

Convert a dictionary to a coll

Convert a coll to a dictionary

533

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Add an array to a dictionary

Number Formats

Decimal to Hex

Hex to Decimal

534

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Decimal to Binary

Binary to Decimal

535

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

String to Array

String to Array

Array to String

Array to String

buffer~ to Array

536

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

buffer~ to Array

Array to buffer~

Array to buffer~ using array.tobuffer

Array to buffer~ (multiple channels)

537

User Guide / Patching / Conversion Cheat Sheet

Each nested array is its own channel

538

User Guide / Patching / Messages

Messages
Messages Overview
Interpreting Messages

539
540

Message Box

541

Messages Overview
Max objects communicate with each other by sending each other Messages. A message consists of
one or more Atoms, where each atom can be a bang, a symbol, an int, or a float.

bang: empty atom, a bang means "do it"
symbol: one or more alphanumeric characters
int: a whole number
float: a number with a decimal part
If a message contains multiple atoms, it's referred to as a list. The atoms in a list are separated by
spaces. If a symbol atom must contain spaces, the whole symbol should be escaped with doublequotes. When an object receives a message, what the object does depends on the first element of
the message. For example, the cycle~ oscillator object can respond to messages by changing its
frequency or phase.

This first element of a Max message, which determines how an object will interpret the
message, doesn't have a special name in Max, but you may sometimes hear it called a
selector, since it functions in a similar way to a selector in programming languages like
Smalltalk or Objective-C.

539

User Guide / Patching / Messages

When a cycle~ object gets a message starting with 'frequency', it responds by changing its internal frequency.
When it gets a message starting with 'phase', it responds by changing its phase instead.

Interpreting Messages
The way an object responds to a message depends on two things: the contents of the message, and
the inlet that receives the message. Generally, every inlet is bound to a specific function, but you
can override that function depending on how you format your message. For example, the second
inlet of the cycle~ object sets the phase of the oscillator, and when cycle~ receives a float or int
value in its second inlet, it will interpret that number as changing the phase of the oscillator.
However, if you really want to, you can send the cycle~ a message like phase 0.5 to any inlet, and
the cycle~ object will always update its phase. This might be a confusing way to design your
patcher, but it's allowed.

Because of this flexibility, an object could respond to multiple messages in the same way. When a
cycle~ object gets a float in its first inlet, it will change its frequency. The same is true if it gets an
int message, or the message float 440 . Also, you could send the message frequency 440 to any
inlet, and the result would be the same.

540

User Guide / Patching / Messages

These messages, when sent to cycle~, all have the same effect. The `frequency 4` message will set the frequency,
even though it's being sent to the right inlet.

Message Box
A Message Box is a special kind of UI object that contains a single message. When you click on a
message box or send it a bang, the message box will respond by sending out its contents as a
message. Message boxes are extremely flexible and fulfill all kinds of functions in a Max patcher.
You can use a group of message boxes to store values, to format other messages, or to view the
messages that are passing between other objects.

Clicking on any of these messages would send a different list to line~, triggering an enveelope with a different
shape

Viewing Messages

541

User Guide / Patching / Messages

The easiest way to view a message is to connect a patch cord to the right inlet of a message box.
Lists of any kind can easily be viewed this way.

Using the right inlet of a message box, it's possible to view even very long and complex messages

One thing to keep in mind when using a message box this way is that the message box will only
display the last message that it received. Sometimes it's not clear that a message box has actually
received multiple messages, since only the last message received will be displayed. When you want
to view all of the messages that have been sent along a given patch cord, you can use the print
object to log messages to the Max console.

The print object will log all received messages to the console, where the message object itself will only show the
most recent message.

542

User Guide / Patching / Messages

Finally, you can set breakpoints and watchpoints on your patch cords, for even more precise
control over how messages move through your patcher. See Debugging and Probing for more
details.

Dollar sign replacement
If a message box contains the special $ character, followed immediately by one of the digits 1-9 ,
that message box will re-format any messages that come through it. The characters $1 will be
replaced by the first element of the incoming message, the characters $2 will be replaced by the
second element, and so on. Characters like $1 and $2 do not need to appear in order, and they
can appear any number of times. So the message $2 $1 will reverse the first two element of an
incoming message, and the message $1 $1 $1 will repeat the first element three times. If you
want a symbol to begin with $1 and for those characters not to be replaced, add the backslash \
character before the $ to escape it.

The special $1 characters are replaced by the first element of the incoming message

Dollar-sign replacement will only work if the characters like $1 appear at the beginning
of a word. So sending a message like 34 to $1-bis would result in 34-bis , but
sending the same message to bis-$1 won't cause any replacement to happen.

Commas
Commas in a message box will cause a single message box to send multiple messages. If you click
on a message box containing the text 1, 2, 3 , that message box will send the message 1 ,

543

User Guide / Patching / Messages

followed by the message 2 , followed by the message 3 . If you're new to Max, probably the first
place you'll see this is in conjunction with the line~ object, where a single-element message sets the
value of line~ immediately, and the following list message gives line~ an envelope to follow.

Commas in a message box cause a single message box to send multiple messages.

Semicolon prefix
Finally, the semicolon character ; has a special meaning whenever it appears at the beginning of a
message. When you trigger a message box beginning with a semicolon, instead of sending that
message to its first outlet, the message box will send a message to the named destination in the
global namespace.

For example, a message like ; max clearmaxwindow will send the message clearmaxwindow to
the global object named max . In this case, this message will tell Max to clear the Max console.
Messages like this are commonly used to script and control the Max application itself. This is useful
for controlling Max with messages, for controlling Jitter with messages, and for controlling DSP with
messages.

Because send and receive objects are also in the global namespace, you can send messages to
these objects as well using messages with the semicolon character. This is not a common pattern,
but you're welcome to do it anyway.

544

User Guide / Patching / Messages

You can send messages to a receive object using a semicolon message, even though it's not very common

Escaping characters
You can use the backslash character to escape a single character anywhere in a message box. For
example, you can use a backslash before the $ character if you want to make sure that the $ is
not interpreted as a placeholder for dollar-sign replacement.

Use the backslash to escape a $ if you want to avoid dollar-sign replacement

To escape multiple characters, or a whole sequence of characters, you can enclose everything you
want to escape in double quotes. Note that single quotes will not work, so the message box
containing 'hi there' contains two symbols: 'hi and there' . Double quotes are often useful
if you want a block of text containing spaces to be interpreted as a single symbol.

Use double quotes to escape multiple characters, especially multiple spaces.

545

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

Message Types
Atoms

546

Lists

548

Named Storage Types

549

Matrices
Textures

549
550

Dictionaries

551

Strings
Arrays

551
551

All Max messages are built up of atoms, which can be a bang, a float, an int, or a symbol. These are
simple types which hold a small, fixed amount of data. An ordered group of atoms is called a list.
These are the fundamental Max data types. For larger, more complex data types, Max messages use
atoms to refer to the place where that more complex data is stored.

Atoms
There are no more fundamental types in Max than bang, float, int, and symbol. An ordered group of
these types is called a list, which also acts a lot like a fundamental Max data type. In a message box,
Max treats each space-separated element as an atom. You can use the typeroute~ object to
separate messagse traveling on a single patch cord by their data type.

546

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

Name

Description

bang

bang means "do it"—most objects respond to a bang by performing their primary
function.

int

A whole number without a decimal component

float

A number with a decimal component

symbol

Any combination of characters, including numeric characters

Floats and Ints
In Max, the difference between an int and a float can be significant. Some objects will have
different behavior depending on whether they receive a float or an int, and some might refuse to
accept one type of number when they expect the other. For a more in-depth discussion, see
Integers and Floats.

Symbols
Symbols can contain any combination of characters. Max will automatically treat any non-numeric
group of characters as a symbol (the one exception is the characters bang , which Max will

547

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

recognize as a bang). If you want to treat a group of numbers as a symbol, or you want your symbol
to contain spaces, use quotation marks.

A symbol is a fixed-length, immutable entity. Adding or removing characters from a
symbol will create a new symbol and add that to the Symbol Table. Often this is a
technical detail that you can safely ignore. If you want to know more, you can read
about symbols and strings.

Lists
A list is just an ordered group of atoms. Often, if the first element of a list is a symbol, the object
receiving the list will interpret the leading symbol as a selector, and the following list elements as
arguments.

Building, manipulating, and routing lists is fundamental to working in Max. You can route a list to
one part of your patcher or another, based on the first element of the list, using the route object.
It's also very common to build lists using dollar-sign replacement in a message box. The list.*
family of objects, like list.append, list.iter, and list.rot, provide even more ways to work with lists.

548

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

Technically, a list must always start with either a float or an integer. If a list starts with a
symbol, then the symbol is the selector, and what follows are the arguments for that
selector. Usually you can ignore this technicality, but the distinction can be important to
remember when working with Max's C or JavaScript APIs. There are also some sneaky
situations that expose what's really going on "under the hood". For example, any object
that accepts a message like ::message[list 1 2 3] will respond the same way to the
message ::message[1 2 3]. So, the "length" of the message ::message[list 1 2 3] is
actually 3.

The list selector instructs the object to treat the arguments that follow as a list.

Named Storage Types
Atoms and lists are primitive in the sense that the name of the data is the same as the data. The
number 12 and the atom 12 are the same. However, for larger and more complex data, it's not
feasible to put the entire block of data into a message box. When one Max object wants to tell
another Max object to process an image that's stored in a matrix, it doesn't send a message
containing the data, but rather the name of the matrix that stores the data.

Matrices
Matrices store multidimensional data, where every cell has the same data type. Matrices are often
used to store images, 3D models, and 3D transformations. The object that manages a reference to a
matrix is called jit.matrix.

549

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

When you view a matrix in a message box, you'll see that matrices are identified by a list with two
parts: the symbol jit_matrix , followed by the unique name of the matrix. For more info on
matrices, see matrix.

Patcher cords that carry matrices also get a special, striped-green style. This is just
cosmetic—as you can see it's simply carrying a normal message.

Textures
Textures are similar to matrices, in that they store multidimensional data of all the same type.
However, the big difference between Max matrices and textures is that textures reside on the
Graphics Processing Unit, or GPU. Max itself manages the data and the life cycle of matrices, but it
asks the graphics API to manage textures on its behalf.

The object that manages a reference to a texture is called jit.gl.texture. When you view a texture in
a message box, you'll see that a texture is identified by the symbol jit_gl_texture followed by
the unique name of the texture. For more info on textures, see textures.

550

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

Like matrices, texture patch cords get their own styling.

Dictionaries
Dictionaries store structured data. That data is organized into keys and values, and you can use the
key to look up the value. A value can be a number, a list, a symbol, a string, an array, or even
another dictionary.

Dictionaries are managed by the dict object, and you can work with dictionaries using the dict.*
family of objects. In a message box, you'll see that dictionaries are identified by the symbol dict
followed by the name of the dictionary. For more info on dictionaries, see dictionaries.

Strings
Strings store an ordered collection of characters. Unlike a symbol, strings are mutable, which means
that a string can be changed without creating a new string.

Strings are managed by the string object and manipulated with the string.* family of objects. In a
message box, you'll see strings represented as by the symbol string followed by the name of the
string. For more info on strings, see strings.

Arrays

551

User Guide / Patching / Message Types

Arrays are an ordered collection of arbitrary data. Unlike lists, arrays can store complex data types
like dictionaries, strings, and other arrays. Max provides the handy array.map and array.reduce for
functional-style programming on arrays.

Arrays are managed by the array object and manipulated with the array.* family of objects. In a
message box, you'll see arrays represented as by the symbol array followed by the name of the
array. For more info on arrays, see arrays.

552

User Guide / Patching / Objects

Objects
Creating an Object

553

Help Files and Reference

557

Arguments
Attributes

557
559

Inlets and Outlets

560

Action Menu
Annotations and Hints

563
564

In Max, you define the behavior of a patcher by connecting together objects. Each object has a
unique character, defined by its name. If you're familiar with programming, you can think of an
object's name as its class name. Objects are connected to each other by patch cords, which define
how messages and data flow between objects.

Creating an Object
You can create a new object in any unlocked patcher by pressing the n key, or by double clicking, or
by dragging in a new object box from the top toolbar.

Autocomplete
Once you've created a new, empty object, simply start typing into the new object box.
Autocomplete should appear, showing you the names of Max objects that are a close match for

553

User Guide / Patching / Objects

your text. Once you've found the name of the object you want to create, press enter or click
outside of the object box to finalize your text.

554

User Guide / Patching / Objects

The small icons to the left of the object name in the autocomplete box tell you what
kind of object matches the current object text. Most of the time, you'll see an o ,
indicating an object. Object boxes can also reference abstractions, and if you start to
type the name of an abstraction, you'll see a p icon instead of the usual o .

Creating UI objects
Some objects, like sliders, dials, and level meters, are user interface or UI Objects. These objects
don't look like most objects, instead they have a custom way of being drawn that's unique to each
one. They may also define some kind of interaction behavior, where clicking and dragging on the
object may have some effect. For example clicking and dragging on a dial will change its value and
cause it to send that value as a message.

You can create UI objects in the same way as other objects. Create a new object box and type the
name of the UI object into the box. As soon as you finalize the object's text, Max will replace the
generic object box with the custom UI display.

555

User Guide / Patching / Objects

You can also use the top toolbar to create UI objects. In fact, the top toolbar contains a large
palette of available UI objects. By clicking in the top toolbar, you can find simple interaction objects
like sliders and dials, audio UI objects like gain controls and level meters, and widgets like a step
sequencer interface. Click on any of these to create a new object in your patcher, or drag and drop
the object to position it exactly where you want.

Resizing objects
When you select an object, resize handles will appear at the object's corners. Click and drag on
these to resize the object. For UI objects, you can hold down the shift key to lock the object's
aspect ratio as you resize it. For regular text objects, holding down shift will let you change the
font size by dragging. This is especially useful for comment objects. Finally, with an object selected,
you can select the "Fix Width" option ( command-j on MacOS, control-j on Windows) to shrink
the object to just fit its text contents.

Editing object text
You can edit the text of an existing object by selecting the object and pressing return, or by
double-clicking on the object (the patcher must be unlocked). Changing the text of an object will
usually replace the original object with a new instance, resetting the internal state of the object to
its original values.

556

User Guide / Patching / Objects

If you need to use special characters in a object's text box, for example a comma or a
quotation mark, you can use the escape rules for special characters. See messages for
more information.

Help Files and Reference
Every object has an associated help file, which describes the object's use and demonstrates its
behavior. You can open the help file for an object by holding option and clicking on it, or by rightclicking on the object and selecting Open Help from the contextual menu.

Every object also has an Object Reference Page, which completely describes the object's behavior.

A short and long description of the object's functionality
The Arguments and attributes that can configure the object
The symbols that the object understands
Other related object and documentation

Arguments

557

User Guide / Patching / Objects

Some objects take arguments that initialize their state and further define their behavior. For
example, the object cycle~ can take three arguments, the first of which defines its initial frequency.
Once you've typed the name of an object into an object box, hit space to start typing the object's
arguments. The autocomplete should update to show the possible arguments for the object.

You can also click on the name of a particular argument to get more information about what that
argument actually does. Clicking on the buffer-name argument for the cycle~ object, for
example, shows some explanatory text about that argument.

The arguments to an object are used to initialize it, and do not reflect the current state of an object.
This is a quirk of working with Max that can be confusing to new users. As a classic example,
sending a message to the right inlet of a + object will change its behavior, but not its appearance.

558

User Guide / Patching / Objects

The + object has 10 as an argument, but its internal state has been changed by a message to its right inlet.

A more subtle point is that arguments might not map easily to something internal to the object that
can be changed after the object is created. For example, the arguments to a gate object change the
number of inlets, and there's no way to update this value after creating the object. This makes
arguments different from attributes, most of which can be modified in the inspector.

Arguments are almost always optional, but some objects do require arguments to
initialize correctly.

Attributes
Attributes are similar to arguments, except unlike object arguments, attributes can appear in any
order, but must be identified by their name. In the text of an object box, attributes always come
after arguments. Attribute names are prefixed with the @ symbol, so an object box with the text
cycle~ @frequency 440 will create a cycle~ object with the frequency 440 . Attributes are

especially useful for complex objects with lots of configuration options. A classic example is jit.grab,
which gets video from a camera device. This object has lots of configuration options, including the
size and format of the video stream. Attributes make it possible to define the state of a complex
object using only the object's text.

559

User Guide / Patching / Objects

An object called `jit.gl.gridshape`, with some attributes defining its state.

Inspecting attributes
Most attributes come with a default setter method, meaning the attribute can be set by sending the
object a message with the name of the attribute and its new value. For example, you can set the
@bgcolor attribute on a toggle object by sending it a message starting with bgcolor .

Object attributes can also be viewed and modified in the patcher using the attrui and getattr
objects. Connect an attrui to an object to get a dynamic dropdown with all of that objects
attributes. Use getattr to listen to the state of attributes as the change.

Finally, select an object and open the Inspector to see and filter all of an object's attributes at once.
This is also the place for freezing attributes, especially handy for saving the state of changed
attributes.

Inlets and Outlets
Almost all objects have at least one inlet or outlet. Objects connect to each other via Patcher Cords,
where a patch cord always connects the outlet of one object to the inlet of another. Some objects
have many inlets or outlets, and sometimes the way an object is configured can change the number
of inlets or outlets that it has.

560

User Guide / Patching / Objects

The way that an object responds to a message will usually depend on the inlet that receives the
message. For example, the first inlet to a gate object lets you set the active outlet, and the second
inlet receives messages to be routed to the active outlet.

You can imagine that the messages to the first inlet choose between the first, second, and third outlets. It looks like
messages are being routed to the second outlet, so the first inlet seems to have received the message `2`

Inlets actually come in two kinds: hot and cold. Hot Inlets will trigger output whenever they receive
a message input, while Cold Inlets do not trigger output, and instead change something about the
object's state. The gate object is a good example—you can see that the left inlet has a blue hue,
while the right inlet has a pinkish tint. Math objects are another classic example, where the cold
right inlet changes how the object acts but does not trigger computation, while the left inlet makes
the computation happen.

The right inlet is a cold inlet, since it just changes the amount of addition but causes no output. The left inlet is a
hot inlet, since it will trigger the actual computation.

561

User Guide / Patching / Objects

With the patcher unlocked, you can hover over any inlet or outlet to see a quick
explanation of its behavior.

If you're making a subpatcher or an abstraction, you can set the @comment attribute to add your
own description that will display when you hover over the inlet or outlet. See subpatcher inlets and
outlets for more information.

Viewing messages and attributes (Quickref)
Right-click on an object inlet (or hold control and click) to see the Quickref for that object. This is
a short list of all of the attributes that the object has, and all of the messages that it will respond to.
This can be an extremely useful way to remind yourself how to work with an object, without
needing to open its help file.

562

User Guide / Patching / Objects

Click on any of these to create a new object in the patcher for controlling that attribute or message.
Clicking on a message will create a message box that can send a formatted message to the object.
Clicking on an attribute will create an attrui object that will let you change that attribute.

Action Menu
Hover over the left edge of an object to show the Action Menu button. Click on this button to show
the Action Menu, which lets you transform and manipulate the object in several useful ways. For
more, see the action menu documentation page.

The action menu button

563

User Guide / Patching / Objects

Annotations and Hints
When you hover over a Max object, the Clue Tab will display information about that object. You can
customize the text that Max displays here by setting the @annotation attribute for a given object.

Setting the @annotation attribute lets you customize the text that displays when you hover over an object.

You can also set the @hint attribute on an object, which will add an "alt-text" style text pop-up
that will display when you hover over the object. This text will only appear if the patcher is locked.

Set the @hint attribute on an object for another way to show descriptive text.

564

User Guide / Patching / Patcher Lifecycle

Patcher Lifecycle
Opening a Patcher

565

Closing a Patcher

567

Opening a Patcher
In general, it's best practice not to make any assumptions about the order in which things will
happen when Max opens up a saved patcher. If there's a way to use an object like trigger to make
the order of messages explicit, it's usually a good idea to do so. However, when Max loads a new
patcher it does initialize the patcher in specific phases.

Max patcher stages of initialization

1. Object Initialization
2. Patchcord Connection
3. Parameter Initialization
4. pattr Restoration
5. loadbang and loadmess
6. live.thisdevice
7. Window Activity
8. Patcher Arguments
9. dspstate~ and Signal Processing
Subpatchers

565

User Guide / Patching / Patcher Lifecycle

Within a given phase, Max subpatchers are initialized before their parents. If a Max patcher
contains a loadbang object, and its subpatcher also contains a loadbang object, the loadbang in the
subpatcher will always output a bang message before the parent. However, a buffer~ object in a
parent patcher will initialize before any loadbang objects output a bang , even if the loadbang
objects are in a child patcher, because Object Initialization comes before loadbang and loadmess.

Object initialization
Max creates all objects in the current patcher. For some objects, this may have synchronous
behavior, where the behavior might otherwise be asynchronous. For example, when a buffer~
object is initialized, if a file argument is provided, that file is loaded synchronously. After the patcher
has loaded, sending a replace message to a buffer~ object triggers an asynchronous operation.

Patchcord connection
After all of the objects in the patcher have been initialized, Max will rebuild all of the patchcord
connections between objects. Importantly, since this happens after object initialization, Max
messages sent between objects during the object initialization step might not be routed between
objects as expected.

Parameter initialization
Next, Max checks all objects for which Parameter Mode is enabled. For any such objects, if they
have an initial value set, those objects will set their internal parameter value to that initial value, and
then output their value.

Select Reinitialize from the Edit menu to set all parameters in the current patcher to
their initial value.

pattr Restoration
If there are any pattr objects with @autorestore enabled, Max will restore the last set value of
each pattr object, and then each pattr object will output a value.

566

User Guide / Patching / Patcher Lifecycle

loadbang and loadmess
Now that all objects have been initialized, loadmess and loadbang objects will generate their
output.

live.thisdevice
The live.thisdevice object functions similarly to loadbang in the context of a Max for Live device. In
a regular Max patcher, live.thisdevice is functionally the same as a loadbang except live.thisdevice
objects will trigger after loadbang objects.

Window activity
After all objects have been initialized, and any loadbang or loadmess objects have sent their output,
Max will create the window and bring it into focus. Any active objects will now send an output.

Patcher Arguments
Patcher arguments (arguments and attributes on a patcher object) are parsed by patcherargs objects
at the same time as loadbang and loadmess objects send their respective messages. However, the
initial output of a patcherargs object is deferred, and will be sent after the window is ready.

dspstate~ and signal processing
Finally, Max is ready to construct the signal processing graph and start audio processing for the
patcher. This is the stage when all dspstate~ objects will send their outputs, reporting the current
sample rate, DSP on/off status, etc.

Closing a Patcher
Similar to the way Max builds up a patcher in stages when opening a new patcher, closing a patcher
also breaks the patcher down in a standard order. Similar to opening a patcher, subpatches close
before parent patches So, a freebang in a subpatcher will send its bang before a freebang in a
parent patcher.

1. closebang

567

User Guide / Patching / Patcher Lifecycle

2. Freeing Objects
closebang
First, the closing the Max patcher window causes any closebang objects to send a bang message.
One interesting thing is that if you close a parent patcher window, with an open subpatcher
containing a closebang object, that object will not send a bang message at this time. However, if
you close the subpatcher window manually first, closebang will send a bang .

Freeing objects
Max goes through all of the objects in the patcher and frees them. This frees any memory or other
resources that each object might have been holding on to. It also causes any freebang objects to
send a bang message.

568

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Patching
Locking/Unlocking

569

Creating Objects

572

Positioning Objects
Copying Objects

572
574

Resizing Objects

574

Aligning Objects

576

Distributing Objects
Grouping Objects

577
578

Presentation Mode

578

Object Ordering
Foreground and Background

580
580

The Grid

581

Routing Patch Cords

583

Changing Colors
Zooming

584
584

Multiple Views

585

Patcher Attributes
Key Commands

585
586

Patching Mechanics

587

Finding Objects and Text

587

Patching Margin
Reinitialize

588
590

The word patching describes everything that you do as part of creating a Max patcher, including
adding, positioning, configuring, and connecting objects.

Locking/Unlocking
A new Max patcher is unlocked by default. Unlocking a patcher is also called putting the patcher in
edit mode.. When unlocked, you can use the mouse and keyboard to create, delete, move, and
connect objects. You can click and drag in the background of a patcher to start a selection, and drag
to select multiple objects.

569

User Guide / Patching / Patching

When the patcher is locked, you can no longer modify objects using the mouse and keyboard (you
can still edit the patcher via scripting). Instead, you can operate user interface (UI) objects (sliders,
dials, buttons, etc.) by clicking and dragging on them. You could say that you unlock a patcher to
work on it, and then lock the patcher to perform with it.

Lock the patcher to control UI objects like sliders

570

User Guide / Patching / Patching

While the patcher is unlocked, you can still operate UI objects as if the patcher were
locked by holding the ⌘ (macOS) key or the CTRL (Windows) key. This is convenient if
you want to adjust an object quickly without locking.

You can lock the patcher by clicking the Lock icon in the bottom toolbar, or by selecting Edit from
the View menu.

Modify read-only
If you open an abstraction, or if you're viewing the contents of a bpatcher, poly~, pfft~, or any other
object that loads a separate patcher, the Edit icon will be disabled and replaced by the Modify readonly icon. A read-only patcher cannot be unlocked by pressing ⌘e (macOS) key or the CTRLe
(Windows) key—you must click on the Modify read-only icon to unlock a read-only patcher. This is to
help you avoid accidentally modifying a patcher that other patchers might depend on.

Patchers that load in read-only mode must be unlocked by clicking the Modify read-only icon.

Operate While Unlocked
With Operate While Unlocked enabled, you can adjust user interface objects using the mouse even
while the patcher is unlocked (in Edit mode). You can enable this mode by clicking the Operate While
Unlocked icon in the bottom toolbar, or by selecting Operate While Unlocked from the View menu.

571

User Guide / Patching / Patching

In this mode, hold down shift while clicking to select UI objects without changing their value. You
can also select a UI object by clicking its border. Hold down shift and start dragging a UI object to
move it, then release shift once you've started dragging.

To perform actions with UI objects that require the option key, hold down the
option and ⌘ (macOS) or CTRL (Windows) keys.

Creating Objects
With the patcher unlocked, create a new object by pressing the n key, or by double clicking. You can
also drag in an object from the top toolbar. Once a new object is created, keyboard focus moves to
the text field in the new object.

A new object, with keyboard focus.

For more on creating objects, understanding objects, and learning about objects, see the dedicated
Objects page in the User Guide.

Positioning Objects
With the patcher unlocked, click and drag on an object to move it. If multiple objects are selected,
the objects will move as a unit. You can also use the arrow keys to make fine adjustments, or hold
shift and press the arrow keys to make large adjustments. As you move objects around your
patcher, the the Clue Bar will show you how your action will affect the object's position.

572

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Pixel alignment
If an object has a position with fractional values, it will no longer align precisely with the pixels used
for display on your screen. This can cause subtle aliasing issues that can affect how objects look.
One way this can happen is if you try to reposition an object while the patcher view is zoomed.

These two multislider objects are displaying the same data, but because the object on the bottom is not pixelaligned, the slider bars look blurry.

There is a patcher attribute called @integercoordinates or Snap to Pixel that enforces whole
number coordinates for all objects in the patcher. You can also select any number of objects that
you'd like to align to the pixel grid and select Apply Grid > Apply 1x1 Pixel Grid from the Arrange
menu to move all selected objects to integer coordinates.

573

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Copying Objects
Select a group of objects and select Copy from the Edit menu to copy them to the clipboard. Select
Paste to paste those objects into the patch. You can also select Duplicate to copy-paste with a single
command. Finally, you can hold option (macOS) or alt (Windows) while dragging a group of
selected objects to copy them before dragging.

After you Paste or Duplicate a group of objects, you can reposition the newly created group of
objects. When you do, Max will remember the offset from the original object group. This lets you
quickly create a large number of evenly-spaced object groups.

1. Select a group of objects
2. Copy and paste (or duplicate) that group
3. Reposition the pasted group
4. Select Paste or Duplicate to paste a new group with the same spacing.

Paste or duplicate multiple times after spacing.

Copy Compressed
The Copy Compressed command from the Edit menu will copy a group of objects as compressed text.
You can share this text anywhere, and restore the objects from compressed text simply by pasting,
or by using the New From Clipboard command from the File menu. See the copy compressed section
of the Sharing page for more information.

Resizing Objects

574

User Guide / Patching / Patching

When any number of objects are selected, you can resize those objects by clicking and dragging on
the white resize handles that appear. Hold shift while dragging to maintain aspect ratio while
adjusting size. Note that some objects, like the toggle object, have an intrinsic aspect ratio that
cannot be changed.

Resize an object using the white resize handles that appear when an object is selected.

Objects that display text, like non-UI objects, comments and message boxes, have a fixed height
that will not change while resizing. Instead, changing the width of the object will reflow its text.
Hold shift while dragging to change the size of object's font while adjusting its width.

Hold shift while adjusting the size of a text object to change its font size along with its height.

575

User Guide / Patching / Patching

For text objects like comment and message, you can select Fix Width from the Object
menu to adjust the width of the object to fit its text.

Use the Fix Width menu command to adjust the width of text objects.

Patching Rectangle
The position of an object in a patcher is called its Patching Rectangle. These four numbers
determine the distance of the object from the left and top edge of the patcher, as well as its width
and height. This value is also exposed as an object attribute called @patching_rect , and can be
adjusted from the inspector.

An object's position is determined in part by its @patching_rect attribute

Aligning Objects
You can align objects by selecting one of the Align options from the Arrange menu. You can align
objects by their left, top, right, or bottom edge, or by their vertical or horizontal center. Most of the
time, you can simply press ⌘j (macOS) or CTRLj (Windows) for the Auto Align command, which will
align objects automatically based on whether they take up more vertical or horizontal space.

576

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Since these objects take up more vertical space, the Auto Align command will align their left edge.

Distributing Objects
You can distribute objects, either vertically or horizontally, equalizing the space between each
object in either direction. Select one of he Distribute options from the Arrange menu, or press
shiftoption⌘h (macOS) or shiftoptionCTRLh (Windows) for horizontal spacing, or press
shiftoption⌘v (macOS) or shiftoptionCTRLv (Windows) for vertical spacing. After
distributing, adjustment handles will appear around the objects, which you can use for further
equal-space adjustments.

After distributing, you can use handles for further refinement.

577

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Grouping Objects
If you want to maintain the spacing between objects, even if one of them is moved, you can assign
them to a group by selecting Group Objects from the Arrange menu. When one memeber of a group
is selected, the whole group will have a thin black border.

When you resize a group using the resize handles, Max will scale the spacing between objects,
rather than the objects themselves.

Presentation Mode
Max is designed both as a visual programming environment and as a tool for building user
interfaces. It's easy to design an interface simply by sizing and positioning objects as you'd like them
to appear. However, when you want to perform with or demonstrate your patch, you might want to
hide or reposition certain objects. By using Presentation Mode, you can configure a special
appearance for your patch, showing just the most important objects.

On the left, the patcher as it appears normally. On the right, the same patcher in presentation mode. Only the
objects that have been selected for presentation mode appear.

578

User Guide / Patching / Patching

In order to add an object to Presentation Mode, select it and then choose Add to Presentation from
the Object menu. Once added, the object will have a pink border. If you no longer want to see the
object in Presentation Mode, select Remove from Presentation from the Object menu.

Adding an object to Presentation Mode simply enables the @presentation or Include
in Presentation attribute.

You can toggle between Presentation Mode and Patching Mode by selecting the Presentation icon
from the bottom toolbar, or by selecting Presentation from the View menu. An object can have a
different size and position in Presentation Mode than in Patching Mode. When you toggle between
the two, you will see objects animate to their new positions and sizes. In addition, you'll notice that
the @patching_rect and @presentation_rect object attributes will be different, reflecting the
two distinct positions for the object.

The selected slider has different values for @patching_rect and @presentation_rect, and the @presentation
attribute is enabled.

If you want a patcher to open in Presentation Mode by default, enabled the Open in
Presentation attribute in the patcher inspector. This can be especially useful for
bpatchers that you intend to use as high-level modules.

579

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Object Ordering
Whenever you add a new object to your patcher, Max adds it on top of any existing objects. By
selecting Send Backward or Send to Back from the Arrange menu, you can instead have other objects
draw on top of the selcted object. The commands Bring Forward and Bring to Front instead cause an
object to be rendered on top of other objects.

After selecting Send Backward, the newly created dial renders behind the cycle~ object.

By making parts of some objects transparent, you can create compound UI object by
layering existing objects in a clever way. You might find the attribute @ignoreclick
useful in this case.

Foreground and Background
Max patchers provide a simplified implementation of a layering system, with a foreground and a
background layer. The main goal of this system is to make it easier to separate documentation
objects like comment and panel from logical objects that affect the behavior of the patcher. Objects
in the background will always be rendered behind objects in the foreground, though both may
appear in Presentation Mode.

By default, all objects are added to the foreground. You can add an object to the background by
selecting Include in Background from the Arrange menu. You can hide and show the background and
foreground by selecting Hide Background and Hide Foreground from the View menu. It can also be
very useful to lock the background, which you can do by selecting Lock Background from the View
menu. When the background is locked, objects in the background cannot be selected. This makes it
possible to rearrange objects in the foregroudn without background objects getting in the way.

580

User Guide / Patching / Patching

The panel object (drawing the rounded rectangle border) cannot be selected, because it's included in the
background and the background is locked.

The Grid
To make it easier to lay out objects visually, you can enable the grid by selecting Grid from the View
menu, or by clicking the Grid icon in the bottom toolbar. The grid is only visible when the patcher is
in Edit mode, and will disappear when the patcher is locked.

581

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Enabling the grid may make object layout more consistent and readable.

By default, the grid is simply a visual indicator, and objects will not be aligned to the grid while
dragging. Choose Snap to Grid from the Arrange menu, and objects will always be alignd to the grid
when you reposition them with the mouse. With this option enabled, objects will also snap to the
grid when you resize them. While repositioning or resizing, you can hold down the ⌘ (macOS) or
CTRL (Windows) key to temporarily disable snapping.

Object before and after grid-alignment

582

User Guide / Patching / Patching

After enabling Snap to Grid, objects that were positioned without this option enabled may not be
aligned to the grid, and will not be aligned automatically. To align existing objects to the grid, select
Apply Grid > Apply Current Grid to Position or Apply Grid > Apply Current Grid to Position and Size from
the Arrange menu.

You can change the size of the grid using the Grid Size patcher attribute, visible from the patcher
inspector.

The Grid Size attribute in the patcher inspector

Routing Patch Cords
To keep your patcher looking clean and organized, you can create segmented patch cords, or you
can have Max route the patch cords for you automatically. Routed patch cords are segmented in a
way that tries to use only right angles while also avoiding intersecting other objects.

583

User Guide / Patching / Patching

A patch cord after automatic routing

Changing Colors
You can change the appearance of most parts of the patcher, including the color of objects, patch
cords, and the patcher background. Color changes can be applied individually, or as a style across
the whole patch.

Change the color and appearance of the patcher itself using the patcher inspector.
Change the appearance of objects by adjusting each object's individual attributes, by setting
a style for each object, or by setting a style for the patcher.
You can also change the color of patch cords in your patcher.

Zooming
You can adjust the zoom level of your patcher, either zooming in to make more precise adjustments,
or zooming out to see more objects at once.

Find a precise zoom level using the Zoom control in the top toolbar.
Select Zoom In from the View menu to zoom in, or Zoom Out from the View menu to zoom
out.
Press z to zoom in, or shiftz to zoom out.

584

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Use the two finger "pinch" gesture to zoom in or out with precise control.

Multiple Views
It's possible to open multiple views of the same patcher. This could let you view a patcher in
patching and presentation mode at the same time, or view a patch at two different zoom levels at
once.

Create a new view of the current patcher using the Patcher Window icon in the Bottom Toolbar.

You can also create a new view of a bpatcher by right-clicking the bpatcher and selecting
Object > New View from the contextual menu.

Patcher Attributes
Behind the scenes, the patcher is a Max object like any other, and many aspects of the patcher can
be controlled with attributes.

585

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Whether the patcher opens in presentation mode
The color of the patcher background
The spacing of the grid
Whether the toolbars are pinned or unpinned
Access these patcher attributes by using the patcher inspector in the Inspector sidebar.

Key Commands
As you patch, you'll find there are several things that you'll do very frequently:

Creating a new object
Adding a comment
Showing a highlight
Viewing a list of recently created objects
Adding a button, slider, or toggle
All of these common actions have a Key Command associated with them. You can press a single
keyboard key (n to make a new object, r to view recent objects, etc.) to perform the associated
action. Most importantly, you can press x at any time to view a list of all available key commands.

586

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Press x anywhere in an unlocked patcher to view a list of key commands.

Patching Mechanics
The Max patching interface supports a handful of useful shortcuts called Patching Mechanics.
These are enabled by default, and you can toggle them on and off using the Enable Patching
Mechanics preference in Max's preferences. These shortcuts make it easier to work with your
patcher by reducing the amount of precise clicking needed to create and arrange objects. See
Patching Mechanics for more information.

Finding Objects and Text
Select Find... from the Edit menu to search for text in your patcher. Max will display a search
interface at the top of your patcher view.

587

User Guide / Patching / Patching

As you enter your search text, Max will show you all of the objects whose text matches your query.
It can also identify objects that do not match in the current patcher, but which match in some
subpatcher. Click on the in a subpatcher text in the search interface to reveal the subpatcher with
the matching object.

The 'effects' subpatcher contains a cycle~ object, so the search view indicates that there are additional matches
within a subpatcher.

Patching Margin
By default, Max will only allow scrolling only until the object in the bottom-right of your patcher is
just in view. That means that even if the current view is full of objects, you won't be able to scroll to
reveal more empty space.

588

User Guide / Patching / Patching

Even though the patcher view is full, there still aren't any scroll bars.

You might prefer to allow scrolling no matter what, so that you can always scroll in order to have
more empty space to patch in. Enable the Patching Margin icon in the bottom toolbar in order to add
additional space to the patcher view to the bottom and right.

589

User Guide / Patching / Patching

With Patching Margin enabled, scroll bars appear when in Edit Mode, giving you more room to patch in

Reinitialize
You can bring a patcher back to an initial state by selecting Reinitialize from the Edit menu. This has
two effects:

Sends a loadbang to the patcher, triggering any loadbang objects in the patcher.
Resets all parameters to their initial value.
Reinitialize works especially well with patchers that take advantage of parameter-aware objects

590

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Patch Cords
Types of patch cords

591

Creating Patcher Cords
Editing Patcher Cords

592
592

Disabling patch cords

594

Viewing Patcher Cord Contents

595

Styling Patcher Cords

596

The inlets and outlets Max objects are connected together using patch cords.

Types of patch cords
There are six kinds of patch cords:

1. Event - Messages sent between Max objects, handled by the scheduler
2. Signal - Audio processed in blocks
3. MC - Multichannel signals
4. Jitter matrix - Video and other multidimensional data, processed on the CPU
5. GL texture - Multidimensional data residing on the GPU, part of graphics processing
6. Jitter geometry - Half-edge geometry structures
Patcher cords can be distinguished by their stripe patterns and colors.

591

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Creating Patcher Cords
You can connect objects with patch cords in a few ways:

Clicking on an inlet/outlet and dragging the mouse to another inlet/outlet
Clicking on an inlet/outlet and then clicking on another inlet/outlet
Hovering or selecting a patch cord, and then using the green or red circles by clicking or
dragging to new inlets/outlets
To disconnect patch cords, you can:

Select a patch cord and use the backspace or delete key on your keyboard
Hovering or selecting a patch cord, and then dragging the green or red circle to an empty
spot on the patcher window

When creating patch cords, if you hold shift as you finalize a connection, Max will
automatically start a new connection from the same inlet or outlet. This can be
extremely useful when creating many patch cords from the same inlet/outlet.

Editing Patcher Cords
Selecting patch cords

592

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Click on a single patch cord to select it. To select multiple patch cords, hold down Option (macOS)
or alt (Windows) while drawing a selection rectangle. This will select objects as well as patch
cords.

Re-connecting patch cords
When a patch cord is selected, a green and red circle will appear next to the inlet and outlet. Click
and drag on either of these to move the patch cord, leaving either the inlet or outlet connected.

With this same technique, you can move multiple connections from one object to another.

You can also shift patch cords along the inlets or outlets of an object.

593

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Inserting/removing objects from a patch cord
Insert an object into the middle of a patch cord by holding Shift while dragging the object.

You can also drag an object out of a patch cord by holding shift while dragging the object. This will
only work if the object has a single connection to the first inlet, and a single connection to the first
outlet.

Patching mechanics
For mouse-free patching, Max supports Patching Mechanics. With this feature activated, you can
do things like create and delete patch cords without using the mouse.

Disabling patch cords
Right-click on any patch cord and select Disable Patcher Cord in the contextual menu to disable it.
Select Enable Patcher Cord from the contextual menu to re-enable the patch cord.

594

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Viewing Patcher Cord Contents
Enabling probing
With Probing enabled, you can view the contents of a patch cord by hovering over it. Max supports
Event Probing, Signal Probing, and Matrix Probing.

Debugging patch cords
With Debugging enabled, you can attach Break Points and Watch Points to a patch cord. These will
show the contents of a patch cord in a separate window, and pause execution when a message
flows through a patch cord.

Illustration Mode is another helpful way to visualize the flow of messages along patch cords.

Extracting a message from a patch cord
With the Event Probe enabled, right-click on an event patch cord and select Convert Last Message to
Object. This will create a message box containing the contents of the last message to pass through
that patch cord.

595

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Styling Patcher Cords
Segmented Patcher Cords
By default, patch cords are drawn in a curved style, but it is also possible to use a "segmented" style
which has joints and corners. You can change the default style in the Max Preferences with the
Segmented Patcher Cords option. To create a segmented patch cord when the Segmented Patcher
Cords option is not checked in the Max Preferences menu (or to create a curved patch cord when
Segmented Patcher Cord is enabled), hold the Shift key down when clicking on an outlet.

When creating segmented patch cords, click at each point where you want the patch cord to bend,
and then click on the inlet/outlet of the other object.

To correct a segmented patch cord while you draw, Option-click (macOS) or Alt-click (Windows) to
erase the most recent patch cord line segment. To remove a patch cord completely, command-click
(macOS) or control-click (Windows) anywhere in the Patcher window.

To automatically create a segmented patch cord from a curved patch cord, right click on the patch
cord and select Align. To automatically create route a segmented patch cord around objects, instead,

596

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

select Route Patch Cord. To change a segmented patch cord to a curved one, right click on the patch
cord and select Remove All Segments.

If you are making a segmented patch cord and want to make a corner over an object, hold down the
control key to disable the normal auto-connection feature.

Coloring patch cords
Patch cords can be individually colored, or styled as a whole using the Format Palette.

To color an individual patch cord, or a selection of patch cords, select all of the patch cords that you
want to color and right-click on one to open the contextual menu. Select Color... to open the color
picker.

To style all of the patch cords in a patcher at once, open the Format Palette and edit the Patchline
Color.

Aligning and routing patch cords
With one or more patch cords selected, open the Arrange menu and select Auto Align to create
aligned, segmented patch cords.

You can also route patch cords automatically, creating segmented patch cords that move between
objects. With one or more patch cords selected, open the Arrange menu and select Route Patcher

597

User Guide / Patching / Patch Cords

Cords.

Hiding patch cords
To hide patch cords in locked patcher mode, right click on a patch cord and select Hide on Lock. To
make hidden patch cords visible again, right click on the patch cord and select Show on Lock.

598

User Guide / Patching / Patching Mechanics

Patching Mechanics
Drag to create new objects

599

Create a new object along a patch cord

599

Insert and remove an object from a patch cord
Navigating the patcher selection with the keyboard

600
601

The Max patching interface supports a handful of useful shortcuts called Patching Mechanics.
These are enabled by default, and you can toggle them on and off using the Enable Patching
Mechanics preference in Max's preferences. These shortcuts make it easier to work with your
patcher by reducing the amount of precise clicking needed to create and arrange objects.

Drag to create new objects
With the patcher unlocked, hold down ShiftAlt and drag an object to instantly create a new
object connected to the first.

Create a new object along a patch cord

599

User Guide / Patching / Patching Mechanics

With a patch cord selected, press Shiftn to create a new object and insert it into the selected
patch cord.

Insert and remove an object from a patch cord
Hold down Shift and drag an object into an existing patch cord, aligning its first inlet with the
patch cord. Max will insert the selected object into the patch cord, replacing its existing connection.
In the same way, hold down Shift and drag an object out of a patch cord to remove that object
from the connection. Max will replace the connection with the selected object removed.

600

User Guide / Patching / Patching Mechanics

Navigating the patcher selection with the keyboard
With an object selected, you can press AltUp to select a patch cord leading into the object.
Pressing AltDown moves the selection to patch cords coming from the object. Then, AltLeft and
AltRight rotate your selection through patch cords.

601

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

Web Browser and jweb
jweb

602

JavaScript Communication
Receiving Messages

603
604

Sending Messages

605

Interacting with Max Dictionaries
Debugging

605
606

Max contains a web browser, implemented with the Chromium Embedded Framework (CEF). You
can access this browser through the jweb object, which lets you embed a web browser in your Max
patcher. The jweb~ object will capture audio from whatever webpage you're on, letting you route
that audio through your patcher. Finally, you can use JavaScript to receive messages from Max, to
send messages to the object outlets, and to access dictionaries in Max.

jweb
Create a jweb object to make an instance of an embedded web browser.

602

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

A jweb object, showing a web page.

The @rendermode attribute determines whether the page is rendered directly in the object view, or
whether it's rendered offscreen and then composited into the patcher. Onscreen rendering is
slightly more efficient, but the jweb browser view will always render on top of other objects.

On the left, offscreen rendering. On the right, onscreen rendering. Onscreen is more efficient, but always renders on
top of any objects in the patcher.

JavaScript Communication

603

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

You can communicate with the contents of a page loaded with jweb through the max object. When
jweb loads a page, it adds this object to the global window object. You can use this to determine,
from JavaScript, whether the page was loaded in Max.

if (window.max) {
console.log("This webpage is loaded in Max, from a jweb object");
} else {
console.log("This webpage is not loaded in Max.")
}

It's important to note that CEF runs in a separate process from the rest of Max. If you send a
message to a jweb object, it will be handled asynchronously. Any messages that come out of jweb
from a call to window.max.outlet will always be handled on the low-priority queue.

Receiving Messages
Use the bindInlet function to receive messages from Max inside a JavaScript callback.

window.max.bindInlet("something", () => {
/*
* code here will be executed whenever jweb receives
* the symbol "something"
*/
});

The bindInlet function can also register a callback that will accept arguments.

window.max.bindInlet("addNumbers", (a, b) => {
console.log(`${a} plus ${b} is ${a + b}`);
});

604

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

You can use the spread operator to handle lists, or messages with a variable number of arguments.

window.max.bindInlet("printLength", (...values) => {
console.log(`The list has ${values.length} elements`);
});

Sending Messages
Use the outlet function to send messages to the outlet of the jweb object.

// output a string
window.max.outlet("foo");
// output a list
window.max.outlet("foo", 1, 2);
// output contents of array with prepended "foo" message
let ar = [1, 2, 3, 4];
window.max.outlet.apply(window.max, ["foo"].concat(ar));

You can also send a message out of jweb using the href attribute of an anchor tag. Note that a
message send this way will be output with the symbol "maxmessage" prepended. The contents of
the message should be separated by the "/" character.

<a href="maxmessage:name/param1/param2">

Interacting with Max Dictionaries
Use getDict to get the contents of a Max dictionary.

605

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

let nestedValue;
// access dictionary
window.max.getDict("dictName", (dict) => {
// dict is a JavaScript object. Dictionary keys
// will be JavaScript object properties, so you
// can fetch values using typical JavaScript syntax.
nestedValue = dict.a;
});

Use setDict to set the contents of a dictionary.

let obj = {
a : "1",
b : "2",
c : "3"
};
window.max.setDict("dictName", obj);

There is no special function to change just one value of a dictionary. To update a dictionary, call
getDict followed by setDict .

window.max.getDict("dictName", (dict) => {
// Increment a numerical value
dict.inc = dict.inc + 1;
window.max.setDict("dictName", dict);
})

Debugging

606

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

You can debug a webpage loaded in jweb using Google Chrome. After you open a remote
debugging port in Max, each jweb instance will be visible as a separate device in the Chrome
debugger. When you open the instance in Chrome, you'll be able to view the JavaScript console, set
breakpoints, and monitor network traffic.

First, make sure to enable a debug port in Max. From Max's preferences, enable remote debugging
by picking a port. Chrome defaults to browsing devices on port 9222 and 9229, so these are good
choices.

You'll need to restart Max for these changes to take effect.

Now, load the webpage you want to debug in jweb.

607

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

A webpage loaded in jweb. This one happens to be served locally.

With the webpage loaded in jweb, open Chrome and navigate to chrome://inspect/#devices .

608

User Guide / Patching / Web Browser and jweb

Click "inspect" under the page that you want to debug. Chrome will open a new window to debug
your page. (If you don't see your jweb instance listed, it might be because you set Max to a jweb
debug port other than 9222 or 9229. Click Configure... to enable your desired port.)

From here, you can debug this webpage just like you would any other. Look for guides releated to
web development and JavaScript programming for more information.

609

User Guide / Reuse and Organization

Reuse and Organization

610

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

Abstractions
Creating an Abstraction

611

Editing an Abstraction

612

Inlets and Outlets
Abstractions vs Subpatchers

612
613

Arguments and Attributes

614

Unique Identifiers
Description, Tags, and Browsing

615
616

Help Patches

617

Any saved Max patcher can be loaded into another patcher as an Abstraction. When you create a
new Max object, if that object has the same name as a Max patcher, Max will load that patcher into
the new object. This lets you create patches that you can reuse over and over again, helping you
patcher faster and more effectively.

Creating an Abstraction
When you create a new Max object, Max will look through the search path for an external or
abstraction with that same name. If Max finds a .maxpat Max patcher file, it will load that file as if
it were a Max subpatcher. Just like a subpatcher, you can view the patcher contained in an
abstraction by double-clicking on it in a locked patcher view.

611

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

The object named `my_abstraction` loads the file `my_abstraction.maxpat` as an abstraction

Your Max patcher can only load another patcher by name if it appears in the current
search path. That means it's very common to see abstractions either saved in the same
folder as the parent patcher, or else included as part of a Project. Of course, you can
load abstractions from anywhere in the Max search path, but managing abstraction
dependencies is a common use case for projects too.

Editing an Abstraction
If you open an abstraction from a parent patcher, it may open in read-only mode. In this mode, you
must click the Modify read-only icon to unlock it for editing. See Modify read-only for more
information.

Inlets and Outlets

612

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

An abstraction will have as many inlets or outlets as it has inlet or outlet objects. If you create a new
inlet and save your abstraction, the parent patcher (the patcher containing the loaded abstraction)
will update to include the new inlet. The order of the inlets in the parent patcher corresponds to the
order of inlets in the abstraction. So, if you swap the position of two inlet objects in the abstraction,
those objects will map to different inlets in the loaded abstraction.

The abstraction has two inlet objects and one outlet object, so the loaded abstraction object has two inlets and
one outlet.

Just like a regular Max object, an abstraction can add Comments to its inlets and outlets. If you set
the @comment attribute on an inlet or outlet object, then when you mouse over the inlet or outlet
you will see that text displayed.

Abstractions vs Subpatchers
Abstractions and subpatchers are very similar, but they have a few key differences. For a start,
abstractions reference a saved .maxpat file, while subbpatchers are embedded in their parent
patcher. That means that you can't edit an abstraction without changing the original file. If you open
an abstraction patcher, you will see that the normal Unlock icon in the patcher toolbar has been
replaced with a pencil icon. Hovering over the icon, you will see the text "Modify read only". If you
click this icon to enable editing, then any changes you make to the abstraction will change the
original file. Consequently, changes you make here will affect all instances of the abstraction. This is
different from embedded subpatchers, where each subpatcher has its own data, and changing one
does not affect the others.

Transformations

613

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

It's possible to convert a subpatcher into an abstraction using the action menu, with the Abstraction
to Embedded Subpatcher command. This command will copy the contents of the abstraction file to a
new subpatcher, which can be really useful if you want to modify an abstraction, but you don't want
to change the original file.

Arguments and Attributes
Abstractions can have arguments and attributes, just like a regular Max object. You can handle
arguments in one of two ways, either using the patcherargs object, or using the special # -sign
syntax for abstractions, Max for Live devices, and poly~ patches.

The # -sign syntax lets you quickly define "insertion points" where the text of any argument will
replace the # -sign text. For example, if you have an object inside an abstraction with the text
buffer~ #1 , then the text #1 will be replaced by the first argument passed to the abstraction

object. If you lock and unlock the abstraction, you can alternate between viewing the text before
and after replacement.

614

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

The #1 symbol in an abstraction will be replaced by the first argument in the parent object.

If you put a patcherargs object into your abstraction, then any arguments that you give to the
abstraction object will come out of the left outlet of patcherargs when the abstraction is loaded.
The patcherargs object can also process attribute-style arguments. These will come out of the right
outlet of patcherargs, one at a time, followed by the done messages. In some sense, patcherargs
works a lot like a loadbang or loadmess object.

A patcherargs object outputs the argumetns of the parent object when the abstraction is loaded.

Unique Identifiers

615

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

Sometimes it's useful to create unique identifiers inside of an abstraction. Suppose you have a
send/receive object pair inside your abstraction. If you create two instances of the abstraction, any
messages sent to the send object in one will be received in the receive objects in both instances. If
this isn't the behavior you want, you can use the special #0 prefix to create a unique number. This
#0 prefix will be replaced by a number unique to each patcher instance, so different instances of

the same abstraction will get a different unique number. In this way, you can use send and receive
in an abstraction, without sharing messages among all instances of that abstraction.

The #0 prefix will only be replaced with a unique number if it appears at the beginning
of the word. In a message box containing the text #0-text , the #0 will be replaced.
However, if the same message box contained the text text-#0 , then the #0 would
not be replaced.

The special #0 prefix will be replaced by a number unique to the specific patcher instance. Different instances of
the same abstraction will get a different unique number.

Description, Tags, and Browsing
The Patcher Inspector has several attributes under the header Description , all of which let you
describe your patcher in one way or another. Max will parse these attributes into its internal
database, meaning you can search for patcher by their description using the File Browser. Tags can
be especially useful, since you can search for tags using advanced search, with a search pattern like
tag:<your-tag> .

616

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Abstractions

Help Patches
Abstractions can have Help Patches, just like regular Max objects. To create a help file for your
abstraction, all you have to do is save a Max patcher with the .maxhelp extension, where the
name of the patcher file is the same as the name of your abstraction. So, if your abstraction is called
my_abstraction.maxpat , the help file should be named my_abstraction.maxhelp . If the help

file is in Max's search path, then when you look up the help file for your abstraction, your custom
help file should open.

617

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / bpatchers

Using bpatchers
Creating a bpatcher

618

Opening the Contained Patcher
Presentation View

620
620

Changing the Patcher's Offset

620

Embeded vs Referenced Patchers

621

Patcher Appearance in bpatchers

621

A bpatcher embeds the interface of a patcher inside a box in its parent patcher.

The audio processing patcher in the center of this patcher is inside a bpatcher.

Creating a bpatcher
You can create a bpatcher either by creating one from scratch, or by transforming an abstraction or
subpatcher into a bpatcher.

618

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / bpatchers

Starting with an Empty bpatcher
Create a new object (by pressing the n key for example), then type the name bpatcher . A bpatcher
will replace the object box when you click outside the box.

An empty bpatcher, immediately after creation

An empty bpatcher won't do anything. Setting the bpatcher's @name or "Patcher File" attribute will
assign a patcher file within the search path to load. After a file is loaded, enable the @embed (Embed
Patcher in Parent) attribute to save the contents of the file in the parent patcher.

You can also assign a file to a bpatcher by dragging a patcher file onto the object from the File
Browser or one of the left sidebar browsers.

Starting with a Patcher File
To turn a named patcher file into a bpatcher, start by pressing the e key. After the object
box appears, type the file's name into the box, then click outside of the box. A bpatcher
containing the file will replace the object box. For more details, see Patcher Appearance in
bpatchers below.
If you hold down the Option key while dragging a patcher file into a empty space in a
patcher window, you'll see a contextual menu with several options. The Create a bpatcher
option will let you create a bpatcher directly with the contents of the .maxpat file.

619

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / bpatchers

Finally, you can drag any patcher file onto a bpatcher to replace the file the bpatcher
currently uses.
Converting a Subpatcher or Abstraction
Given any subpatcher or abstraction, you can also open the Action Menu and select Transform >
Patcher to Bpatcher to convert to a bpatcher. You can also transform a bpatcher to a subpatcher or
abstraction with the same menu.

Opening the Contained Patcher
Choose Open from the bpatcher's Action Menu to view and edit the bpatcher's contained patcher in
a separate window.

Editing an embedded patcher
If you open an embedded bpatcher from a bpatcher object in the parent patcher, it may open in
read-only mode. In this mode, you must click the Modify read-only icon to unlock it for editing. See
Modify read-only for more information.

Presentation View
By default, a bpatcher will display its patcher's patching view. If you want to display the
Presentation View instead, enable the @openinpresentation (Open in Presentation) attribute in
the patcher file the bpatcher contains (not the bpatcher itself) using the Patcher Inspector.

Changing the Patcher's Offset

620

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / bpatchers

Often you'll want to set up a bpatcher to have a dynamic display, changing its presentation
depending on some value. The best way to achieve this is by changing the @offset attribute of the
bpatcher object, which will shift the origin of the displayed view by the desired horizontal and
vertical amount. Since bpatcher is a slightly unusual object, you have to set this attribute using a
thispatcher object in the embedded subpatcher. See the bpatcher help file for more details.

Overview of the offset technique for adjusting the display of a bpatcher

Embeded vs Referenced Patchers
As mentioned above, a bpatcher can either refer to an existing patcher file or embed its contents in
its parent. The differences are similar to subpatchers and abstractions. When you enable the
@embed attribute on a bpatcher, the contents of the bpatcher will be saved with the parent

patcher.

If @embed is not enabled, the bpatcher references a patcher file specified in its name attribute. As
with abstractions, changes to the original file will update every bpatcher that refers to that file. See
abstractions for more detailed information on working with bpatchers that reference patcher files.

Patcher Appearance in bpatchers

621

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / bpatchers

As mentioned above, when loading a patcher file, the bpatcher will use the openinpresentation
attribute of the patcher to determine whether to show it in patching or presentation mode.

In addition, the patcher file can control the bpatcher's initial size and appearance when using the e
command to create the object.

To assign a default size for the bpatcher, use the openrect (Fixed Initial Window Location).
The x and y coordinates of the openrect are ignored, but the width and height will be
assigned to the bpatcher's initial width and height.
If openinpresentation is enabled and openrect is not set, the enclosing rectangle for all
objects that belong to the presentation will be used as the bpatcher's initial size.
As an example, this patcher contains a function object that has been added to the presentation.

When using the e command and typing this patcher file's name, the resulting bpatcher frames the
function object as shown below.

622

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / bpatchers

623

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

Custom UI Objects
Customzing Existing UI Objects
The jsui Object

624
628

MGraphics

631

Sketch
JSPainter vs jsui in Depth

633
635

In addition to creating a completely new object by writing your own Max External, you can also
customize the appearance of Max objects using JavaScript. If you want to change the look of an
existing user interface object, you can set its @jspainter attribute to a JavaScript file with your
custom drawing code. If you want to create a UI object with custom behavior, you can use the jsui
object, which combines the js object with a context you can draw to. Most custom drawing uses the
MGraphics API for "painter's canvas" style drawing, and in fact this in the only drawing API available
with @jspainter . With jsui you can use either MGraphics or the older Sketch API, which wraps a
lower-level OpenGL 2.1 drawing context.

Customzing Existing UI Objects
To customize the appearance of an existing Max object, set the @jspainterfile attribute of that
object to a JavaScript file containing JavaScript drawing code.

624

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

In that JavaScript file, you must implement the paint function to define the appearance of the
object, where you can use the MGraphics API for drawing. A very simple implementation that
replaces the existing paint function with a solid color would look like this:

function paint() {
var viewsize = mgraphics.size;
var width = viewsize[0];
var height = viewsize[1];
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(
box.getattr("bgcolor")
);
mgraphics.rectangle(0, 0, width, height);
mgraphics.fill();
}

Attributes and Value
When using @jspainterfile , call box.getvalueof() to return the value of the parent object.
This lets you change your drawing based on the current value of the object, for example changing

625

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

the length of a slider or the angle of a dial. This will always be an array value, so if the object has a
single number as its value, it will be stored in an array of size 1.

// Custom drawing for a 'toggle' object
function paint() {
var val = box.getvalueof(); // this is an array of size 1
var isToggleOn = val[0] > 0;
var viewsize = mgraphics.size;
var width = viewsize[0];
var height = viewsize[1];
if (isToggleOn) {
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(box.getattr("checkedcolor"));
} else {
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(box.getattr("uncheckedcolor"));
}
mgraphics.rectangle(0, 0, width, height);
mgraphics.fill();
}

Mapping styles to attributes
Using the box.attrname_forstylemap() function, you can retrieve the name of the attribute for
a given Style element. For a list of valid Style element names, check your Theme. For example, the
style element names for the standard Max theme are

"bgcolor", "color", "elementcolor", "accentcolor", "selectioncolor",
"textcolor", "textcolor_inverse", "patchlinecolor", "clearcolor",
"locked_bgcolor", "editing_bgcolor", "stripecolor", "darkcolor",
"lightcolor", "bgfillcolor_type", "bgfillcolor_color1",
"bgfillcolor_color2", "bgfillcolor_color"

This can be useful if you want to look up an object's attribute name based on its function, rather
than its internal name. For example, here's generic code for a custom, solid-color toggle, using
colors from Max's current theme.

626

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

// Solid-color toggle, using theme colors
function paint() {
var val = box.getvalueof(); // this is an array of size 1
var isToggleOn = val[0] > 0;
var viewsize = mgraphics.size;
var width = viewsize[0];
var height = viewsize[1];
var onColorName = box.attrname_forstylemap("color");
var offColorName = box.attrname_forstylemap("elementcolor");
var oncolor = box.getattr(onColorName);
var offcolor = box.getattr(offColorName);
if (isToggleOn) {
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(oncolor);
} else {
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(offcolor);
}
mgraphics.rectangle(0, 0, width, height);
mgraphics.fill();
}

Calling the original paint function
The mgraphics API includes a method parentpaint that will call the original object's paint
method. This lets you draw on top of (or under) the standard interface for the object. For example,
here's a way to render a border on top of the standard native object UI using the underlying object's
"elementcolor" style color:

627

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

function paint() {
var viewsize = mgraphics.size;
var width = viewsize[0];
var height = viewsize[1];
// call original object paint method
mgraphics.parentpaint();
// the actual underlying attribute name may be different
// so we use the attrname_forstylemap() method to map
// the style color to object attribute name
var colorname = box.attrname_forstylemap("elementcolor");
var bordercolor = box.getattr(colorname);
// draw border rectangle over it
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(bordercolor);
mgraphics.rectangle(0.5, 0.5, width - 1, height - 1);
mgraphics.stroke();
}

The jsui Object
Like the js object, jsui refers to a separate JavaScript file to define its behavior. In most ways, jsui is
the same as a js object, except jsui also has a drawing surface that you can use to implement your
own custom appearance.

The easiest way to implement custom drawing with jsui is using mgraphics. Call mgraphics.init
somewhere in the global scope of your JavaScript file (typically near or at the top) and then make a
paint function where you define your custom drawing. Max will call this function when the object
needs redrawing, or after you call mgraphics.redraw() .

When using jsui, you also have access to the older Sketch API. This is really a completely separate
drawing model, and while it's possible to use sketch at the same time as mgraphics, it's not
intended. The Sketch API currently uses a legacy OpenGL 2.1 context, and so it supports low-level
graphics functions, but not a very modern implementation. Unlike MGraphics, with sketch you
redraw your object manually by calling refresh() .

628

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

Event handlers with jsui
The jsui object can also handle simple UI events, including mouse and resize events. To respond to
these events, implement a function with a name like on<eventname> where <eventname> is the
name of the event you want jsui to respond to. For example, to handle a mouse click event:

function onclick(x, y) {
someOtherFunction(x, y);
mgraphics.redraw();
}

The full arguments to any of the mouse events include
x, y, button, mod1, shift, caps, opt, mod2 , which will be the x, y position of the mouse

click in the jsui object, the phase of the event, the state of the left modifier key, the state of the
shift key, the state of caps lock, the state of the option key, and the state of the right modifier key.
You can see full documentation for these functions in the jsthis JavasScript documentation The
supported functions are:

/**
* Receives initial click events.
* @remarks
* The "button" argument will always be 1.
*/
function onclick(x, y, button, mod1, shift, caps, opt, mod2) { }

/**
* Receives double click events.
* @remarks
* The "button" argument will always be 1.
*/
function ondblclick(x, y, button, mod1, shift, caps, opt, mod2) { }

629

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

/**
* Receives drag events.
* @remarks
* The "button" argument will be 1 while dragging, and 0 when dragging
stops.
*/
function ondrag(x, y, button, mod1, shift, caps, opt, mod2) { }

/**
* Receives mouse events over the object.
* @remarks
* Equivalent to a "mouse over" event. The "button" argument will always
be 0.
*/
function onidle(x, y, button, mod1, shift, caps, opt, mod2) { }

/**
* Mouse event as the cursor leaves the object boundaries.
* @remarks
* Equivalent to a "mouse out" event. The "button" argument will always be
0.
*/
function onidleout(x, y, button, mod1, shift, caps, opt, mod2) { }

There is one more event that will be received when the object resizes.

/**
* Receives the new size of the object in width and height
*/
function onresize(width, height) { }

630

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

MGraphics
MGraphics uses a "painter's canvas" drawing model. You call functions that create shapes, paths,
text, or other things to draw, and then fill or stroke them to add to the current canvas. Whether
you're using MGraphics with jsui or the @jspainter attribute, you don't ever draw to the canvas
directly. Rather, you implement a paint function, which Max will call whenever the object needs
to be redrawn. You can also call mgraphics.redraw() , which will tell Max to redraw the object as
soon as it can. A simple paint function might look like this:

// Implement this somewhere in your custom drawing code
function paint() {
mgraphics.rectangle(-0.2, 0.2, 0.2, -0.2)
mgraphics.fill()
}

Initialization
In the global scope of your JavaScript file, usually near the top, call mgraphics.init() to initialize
your object for MGraphics drawing. This is also a good time to configure the MGraphics context
globally—you could configure mgraphics for relative coordinates, or tell mgraphics not to fill
shapes automatically when you use the stroke() functions by disabling autofill .

// Set up the object for mgraphics drawing
mgraphics.init();
// Optionally, configure the global mgraphics instance
mgraphics.relative_coords = 1;
mgraphics.autofill = 0;

Shape Drawing

631

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

Whether you're drawing a path, shape, or text, the formula for drawing with MGraphics is more or
less the same:

Set the colors and properties of the thing you want to draw.
Create the path, shape, text, or other thing to draw.
Call a function to execute the drawing.
So a drawing routine might look like:

function paint() {
mgraphics.set_source_rgba(0.2, 0.2, 0.2, 1);
mgraphics.set_line_width(0.03);
mgraphics.move_to(-1.0, -1.0);
mgraphics.line_to(1.0, 1.0);
mgraphics.stroke();
}

This drawing function is using the relative coordinate system: the move_to call moves to the topleft of the drawing context, and line_to draws a line ending in the bottom-right.

Coordinate System
MGraphics supports two coordinate systems: relative and absolute. With absolute coordinates, the
origin (0, 0) is the top-left of the canvas, and (width, height) would be the bottom-right of
the canvas. If your display was 400 by 200 , you could draw an 'X' filling this area with code like
this:

632

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

/**
* Draw a cross using absolute coordinates. This shape will always be the
* same size, no matter how the mgraphics context is resized.
*/
function paint() {
mgraphics.move_to(0, 0) // the top-left
mgraphics.line_to(400, 200) // the bottom-right
mgraphics.stroke() // draw it
mgraphics.move_to(400, 0) // the top-right
mgraphics.line_to(0, 200) // the bottom-left
mgraphics.stroke()
}

Switch to the relative coordinate system by setting relative_coords to 1 on your MGraphics
object. After enabling relative coordinates, the origin (0, 0) will be at the center of the canvas,
the point (-1, -1) will be at the top-left, and (1, 1) will be at the bottom-right.

/**
* Draw a cross using relative coordinates. This drawing will stretch to
* fill the full width and height of the drawing context
*/
mgraphics.relative_coords = 1;
function paint() {
mgraphics.move_to(-1, -1) // the top-left
mgraphics.line_to(1, 1) // the bottom-right
mgraphics.stroke() // draw it
mgraphics.move_to(1, -1) // the top-right
mgraphics.line_to(-1, 1) // the bottom-left
mgraphics.stroke()
}

Sketch

633

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

JavaScript files loaded by the jsui object have access to an instance of Sketch through the global
sketch object, which can be used for drawing using the Sketch API. Sketch is an older API than

MGraphics, wrapping a legacy OpenGL 2.1 drawing context. It is not the most modern way to
implement custom interfaces with jsui or @jspainterfile , though it's still available if you need to
use the low-level OpenGL functions that the API exposes.

The Sketch API provides high-level functions like sphere and torus , as well as low-level
functions like glclearcolor . These lower level functions, all prefixed with gl , are thin wrappers
around OpenGL functions. You can find the most complete, accurate documentation for these
functions by checking the OpenGL documentation.

Colors and coordinates
Color values are floating point numbers in the range 0. to 1. Color support an alpha channel, with all
colors in RGBA format. If an alpha value is not provided, it is assumed to be 1—totally opaque. To
disable alpha blending, use sketch.gldisable("blend") . If you want to disable depth buffering,
which can interfere with alpha blending, use sketch.gldisable("depth_test") .

Unlike some graphics APIs, the OpenGL API does not distinguish between 2D and 3D drawing.
Conventional 2D drawing is simply a subset of 3D drawing calls with specific graphics state--e.g. no
lighting, no depth testing, orthorgraphic projection, et cetera. High level utility methods are
provided as a convenience to setup up the OpenGL graphics state to something typically used for
2D or 3D graphics. If assuming 2D drawing conventions, one can ordinarily use z coordinates of
zero for all methods that require them.

Coordinates in OpenGL are also given in terms of floating point relative world coordinates, rather
than absolute pixel coordinates. The scale of these world coordinates will change depending on the
current graphics transformation--i.e. translation, rotation, scaling, projection mode, viewport, etc.
However, our default mapping is that Y coordinates are in the range -1 . to 1 from bottom to top,
and X coordinates are in the range -aspect to aspect from left to right, where aspect is equal
to the ratio of width/height . In the default case, (0,0) will be center of your object,
(-aspect,1.) will be the upper left corner, and (aspect,-1.) will be the lower right corner.

User events like mouse clicks will be in absolute screen coordinates. Use
sketch.screentoworld() and sketch.worldtoscreen() to convert between OpenGL world

coordinates and screeen coordinates.

634

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Custom UI Objects

OpenGL conventions and differences
Sketch methods are all lowercase, so the OpenGL function glBegin is wrapped by the
Sketch function glbegin .
Instead of using symbolic constants like GL_LIGHTING , Sketch simply uses lowercase
JavaScript strings without the GL_ prefix. So instead of GL_LINE_STRIP , use
"line_strip" with Sketch.

Sketch doesn't have special vector versions of its functions, and only floating point numbers
are supported. So glColorv4fv() is simply sketch.glcolor() .
Sketch functions can take arrays as well as individual arguments, so
sketch.glcolor(0.5, 0.5 0.5) and sketch.glcolor([0.5, 0.5, 0.5]) are both

supported.

JSPainter vs jsui in Depth
When using @jspainterfile , all of the underlying logic of the object is still handled in native Max
C code. Your JavaScript drawing function changes how the object appears, but nothing else. Like a
standard Max object, message scheduling happens in the high priority scheduler thread, and
painting happens in the low priority application thread. The jsui object has the same limitation as
the js object: all object logic is executed in the low priority application thread. However, with jsui
you're also free to change the object's behavior, just like with the js object.

JSPainter limitations
JSPainter is powerful but has some limitations. While drawing with JSPainter, any use of the Task
object to support timing information in the UI is not supported. Also, objects with text fields will
have some issues. Text may be rendered with standard mgraphics API calls, but as is the case with
JSUI, there is no automatic linewrapping, and if the underlying object has a textfield (as do number
boxes, message objects, comment objects and the standard text object), there will be conflicts or
missing text. For this reason the jspainterfile attribute is hidden for such objects. And finally, there
is no support for @autowatch or double clicking to open the jspainterfile in a text editor.

635

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Externals

Externals
Installing Externals

636

Security

637

Developing Externals

637

Resolving Errors and Troubleshooting

638

Under the hood, Max objects are basically small programs. The essence of Max is to create new
behaviors by connecting these small programs together. Because of this modular design, third
parties can extend the functionality of Max by programming their own objects. These objects are
called Externals, since they're authored externally to the main Max program.

Externals are like audio plug-ins for a DAW, they allow Max to be extended to support new objects
at any time. Max actually ships with many externals and many more are available for free on the
Internet.

Externals are bundles of executable code, stored in .mxo files on non-Windows operating systems,
and .mxe64 files on Windows. When an object receives a message, or when Max calculates a
vector of audio data, it calls a function inside each object to perform the necessary computation.

Installing Externals
In order to install an External, simply put the .mxe64 or .mxo file into Max's Search Path. When
Max launches, it scans its Search Path for any External files. If it finds any, it automatically adds
them to internal database. Those objects will appear in Max's new object autocomplete, and you
will be able to create a new object from any dicovered externals.

636

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Externals

More complex externals may have dependencies that will need to be installed as well.
For example, an external might rely on a Dynamic Library or dll to function. In
general, follow the instructions provided by the external author to install correctly.

If the external you want to install is part of a Max Package, then you don't need to do anything
special to install it. The external wil be included automatically along with the rest of the package. If
you're trying to install an external on its own, you can put it anywhere in the current Search Path.
The Library folder, found at %HOMEDRIVE%%HOMEPATH%\Documents\Max 9\Library on
Windows, and at ~/Users/Max 9/Library on non-Windows operating systems, is a generic folder
for storing files that you want to be included in Max's Search Path. It can be a useful place to store
externals if you'd like them all to be in one place.

Security

Externals are programs. Just like you wouldn't download and run a program from
someone you don't trust, don't install any externals from untrusted sources either. Also,
keep in mind that externals run as part of the main Max program. Whatever
permissions you give Max, your externals will have those same permissions.

Developing Externals
In order to communicate with the Max application, an external needs to tell Max what messages it
responds to, how many inlets and outlets it has, whether it processes audio, and much more. All of
this is accomplished using the Max SDK, a library of functions that can program can use to register
as a Max external.

You can get the SDK, and learn to write your own externals, using the SDK Documentation.

637

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Externals

In addition to the C SDK, there is also a C++ SDK called Min. This version of the SDK can
streamline writing Max externals, and supports some advanced features not readily available to the
C SDK. You can learn more about the Min SDK from the Min SDK Documentation.

Resolving Errors and Troubleshooting
When developing or installing new externals, you may see a message like the following when you
try to load your external.

This message, "could not load due to incorrect architecture", means that Max recognized the .mxo
or .mxe file as an external, but could not execute the code inside that object because it was
compiled for a different hardware architecture. This can happen when trying to use a 32-bit
external while running a 64-bit version of Max, or when trying to use an external compiled for an
Intel architecture while runnning an ARM (Apple Silicon). Usually the best solution is to find a
version of the external that's compiled for the same architecture that you're trying to use (or to
rebuild your own external with new build settings). However, on MacOS, it's also possible to run
Max using Rosetta, which will let you use externals compiled for intel architecture. To do so, first
quit Max, then right click on the application, choose Get Info , and then enable "Open using
Rosetta".

638

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Externals

639

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

Packages
Packages Folder

640

Package Folder Structure

641

package-info.json
The Left Toolbar

643
647

Submitting a Package

648

Packages are a convenient means of bundling objects, media, patchers, and resources for
distribution. Most of the time, if you're just looking to manage resources specific to a project, then a
Project is probably what you're looking for. However, if you'd like to share your work more broadly,
especially if you're building a reusable set of tools to submit to the Package Manager, then
packages are right choice.

A package is simply a folder adhering to a prescribed structure and placed in the appropriate folder.
When Max launches, it will iterate through these packages and load them, making their resources
available for use.

Packages Folder
If a package is available in the Package Manager, then you should use the package manager to
install and uninstall that package. However, you can also install packages yourself, which can be
useful if you want to use a package that's not currently in the package manager.

You can install a package by copying the package folder into Max's packages folder. The userspecific packages folder is at %HOMEDRIVE%%HOMEPATH%\Documents\Max 9\Packages on Windows
and ~/Documents/Max 9/Packages on macOS. The other (system wide) location is in
/Users/Shared/Max 9/Packages on MacOS, and %HOMEDRIVE%\ProgramData\Max 9\Packages

on Windows.

You can uninstall a package by deleting it from the packages folder.

640

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

Package Folder Structure
The name of each folder in a Max package determines how Max will load the files in that folder.
Some of these folders will also be automatically included in Max's Search Path.

Folder
clippings

code

Search
Path

Description

✅

Patchers to list in the "Paste From..." contextual menu when

✅

Gen patchers

patching

collections

Collections to list in the File Browser that are associated with
the package

defaultdefinitions

Definition info for Object Defaults support in UI externals

default-settings

Saved color schemes for Object Defaults

devices
docs

examples
extensions
externals
extras
fonts
help
icon.png

✅
✅
✅
✅
✅
✅
✅
✅

Max for Live devices (AMXDs)
Reference pages and Vignettes to be accessible from the
Documentation Window
Example patchers and supporting material
Special external objects loaded on Max launch
External objects
Patchers to be listed in the "Extras" menu
Custom fonts available to Max when the Package is present
Help patchers and supporting material
A PNG graphic file (500x500px) for display in the Package
Manager

init

Text files interpreted by Max at launch

641

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

interfaces

Supporting files for objects to display in the top patcher toolbar and
other Max integration.

java-classes

✅ Compiled Java classes for use in mxj/mxj~. Place .jar folders in a 'lib'
subfolder.

java-doc
javascript
jsextensions
jsui

Documentation for Java classes

✅ Javascript files to be used by js
✅ Extensions to JS implemented as special externals or js files
✅ Javascript files to be used by jsui, and listed in the contextual menu
for jsui

license.txt or

Terms of use / redistribution of your package, in plain text or

license.md

markdown

media
misc
patchers
projects

✅ Media files to be included in the searchpath
✅ Anything
✅ Patchers or abstractions to be included in the searchpath
✅ Projects to be included in the searchpath. Note that only the project
file will be added to the searchpath.

object-icons

✅ An SVG-format object icon for a particular Max object (named
<objectname>.svg), used in the Object Browser

object-prototypes

Object Prototypes will be listed in the contextual menu for a
selected UI object

readme.txt or
readme.md

Information about your package, in plain text or markdown

snippets

Snippets associated with this package

source

Source code for external objects, ignored by Max

support

Special location for DLL or dylib dependencies of external objects.
Added to the DLL search path on Windows.

templates

Template patchers to be listed in the "File > New From Template"
menu

642

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

package-info.json
The package-info.json file is the manifest of your package. It includes metadata about your package
like its name and description, as well as including a list of important files in your package. If you're
not familiar with the JSON format, it's a common format structured text built around numbers,
strings, arrays and dictionaries.

name
The name of the package. Should be unique among packages. This doesn't affect how the name of
the package will appear in Max.

displayname
This is the name of the package as it will appear in Max, both the Package Manager as well as other
places.

version
A semantic versioning compatible string.

{
"version": "0.6.0"
}

author
Author string, for a single author.

authors
Array of author strings, for multiple authors

643

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

{
"authors" : [ "Arthur Author", "Otter Auter" ]
}

description
Brief description. It's a good idea to list any dependencies here, or additional relevant information.

tags
An array of strings containing developer-defined tags, if any.

{
"tags" : [ "audio", "DSP", "visualization" ]
}

website
If the package or author has a website, note it here.

extensible
An integer (0 or 1) to indicate whether this package can be extended by another package. Package
extension means that the extending package becomes logically part of the extensible package in
terms of how it appears in the File Browser and Reference Window. For instance, the RISE package
extends the extensible BEAP package. As such, RISE patchers and documentation are included in
the BEAP package entries in the File Browser and Reference.

extends
If the package extends an extensible package, note that package name here.

max_version_min

644

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

The minimum Max version this package supports (or "none" if there is no specific minimum version).

{
"max_version_min": "8.0.0"
}

max_version_max
The maximum Max version this package supports (or "none" if there is no specific maximum
version).

{
"max_version_max": "none"
}

os
Optionally restrict the installation of this package to certain platforms or architectures.

{
"os": {
"macintosh": {
"min_version": "none",
"platform": [ "x64", "aarch64" ]
},
"windows": {
"min_version" : "none",
"platform" : [ "x64" ]
}
}
}

645

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

The info above would indicate that this package can run on 64-bit Intel Windows and macOS
computers, as well as 64-bit Apple Silicon-based computers ( aarch64 ). "x32" would indicate 32bit compatibility, although recent Max versions no longer support 32-bit OSs.

Note that the min_version fields on Windows use some specific strings to indicate specific OS
versions: "none" , "11" , "10" , "8.1" , "8" , "7" and "7SP1" are the only ones which are
relevant for modern Max.

On macOS, the min_version field should be a Semantic Versioning string matching a macOS
version (e.g. "10.5.2" or "12.5" ).

homepatcher
If the package has a "landing patcher" in its patchers folder, note the patcher name here. This will
be the package that opens when you click the Launch button in the package's detail page in the
Package Manager.

{
"homepatcher": "name of the home patcher.maxpat"
}

toolbar_icon
This lets you identify an SVG in your package that will be used as the package's icon in the left
toolbar. Read more about this below.

package_extra
Optional fields. You can put anything you want here, but Max won't use these values. The one
exception is the forcerestart key.

package_extra.forcerestart

646

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

Set to 1 if you would like Max to prompt the user to restart after installing your package from the
Package Manager.

{
"package_extra": {
"reverse_domain": "com.cycling74",
"copyright": "Copyright (c) 2022 Cycling '74",
"forcerestart": 1
}
}

filelist
While you may see this field in some package-info.json , it's automatically generated and not
used for most packages. You should not include this property in your own package-info.json .

c74install
You may also see this property in installed packages, but do not add this to your
package-info.json file. It is automatically added by the Package Manager when installing

packages.

installdate
This is another field that is managed by the Package Manager. Do not add this to your
package-info.json file.

The Left Toolbar
If your package includes clippings or snippets, those will be shown in the Modules menu in the left
toolbar. The user can also add a dedicated icon for your package by right-clicking on an empty
space in the left toobar and adding your package. You can customize the appearance of this icon by
adding an appropriate SVG file to your package.

647

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Packages

You can point to this icon file in your package's package-info.json file, using the
"toolbar_icon" field. For example,

"toolbar_icon" : "my_icon.svg"

Alternatively, if no "toolbar_icon" is defined in package-info.json , you can name the file
<packagename>_toolbar.svg where <packagename> is case-sensitive and must match the name

of your package, and Max will automatically use that file as the toolbar icon.

If you use this second method to name your icon, and your package name contains a
space, then the icon file should use underscores instead of spaces. For example, if your
package is named "My Package", then the icon file would need to have the name
My_Package_toolbar.svg.

In either case, the SVG file should be placed in some subfolder of your package which is included in
the search path -- we recommend the misc/ folder.

If you do not include an icon in this way, a two-letter icon will be auto-generated from your package
name.

Submitting a Package
If you'd like your package to appear in the offical Package Manager, you should share it with us.
Find the submission form on our website at https://cycling74.com/support/submit-packages.

648

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Package Manager

Package Manager
Browsing and Installing Packages

649

Managing Installed Packages

651

Package Install Location

651

Package Updates and Versions

652

The Package Manager provides instant access to a regularly updated, curated selection of Max addon content and tools. The Package Manager allows you to manage which Packages are currently
installed in Max. From the package manager you can install new packages, enable/disable existing
packages, update or downgrade installed packages, and launch the default patcher for a given
pacakge.

To access the Package Manager, select Show Package Manager from the File menu.

Browsing and Installing Packages
By default, the package manager opens in the Browse Remote Packages view. letting you browse
through packages that you do not currently have installed. You can instead view the list of currently
installed packages by selecting Installed Packages from the drop-down menu at the top of the
window.

649

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Package Manager

Click on a package to inspect its details. This will show you information such as system
requirements, a description of the package, and a link to the package author’s website.

650

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Package Manager

To install a package, click the blue Install button. Once a package is installed, click the Launch
button (if available) to view the Launch Patcher for the package. The Show in Filebrowser button will
open the package in the File Browser, letting you see all the files included in the package.

Managing Installed Packages
At the top of the package manager window, click the drop-down menu and select "Installed
Packages". This will list all installed packages, including both those you installed through the
package manager, as well as those you might have added by dropping them in the Packages folder.

To disable a package without deleting it entirely, click the Disable button after selecting the
package. Max will ignore any files in a disabled package, but the package will remain downloaded
and installed.

Many packages, including any packages that contain externals, will require a restart of
Max before changes take effect.

You can remove a package entirely by clicking the red Uninstall button.

Package Install Location
All packages are installed in your User Packages Folder, located at
%HOMEDRIVE%%HOMEPATH%\Documents\Max 9\Packages on Windows, and at
~/Users/Max 9/Packages on macOS. You can install packages that aren't available in the package

manager, including your own custom packages, by dropping them in this directory.

Note that if you install a package that is itself available on the Package Manager by dropping them
in this directory, the Package Manager will warn of a conflict. We recommend installing a package
via the Package Manager if available in order to stay informed of updates to that package.

651

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Package Manager

Don't change the folder names for any packages installed using the package manager.

Package Updates and Versions
The Package Update icon in the bottom-right of the package manager window will highlight if there
are updates available for any installed packages.

Click on the Package Update icon to show all packages with an available update.

652

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Package Manager

You can change the installed version of any package by clicking "Show All Available Versions" in the
package detail view. If you have a self-installed Package that conflicts with a Package available in
our online library, you will have the option to overwrite it with our version or ignore it and leave it
unchanged.

653

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Package Manager

The Package Manager itself is automatically updated with each version of Max.
Occationally, you may be prompted to update the Package Manager when you open the
window if an update is available.

654

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

Projects
Creating Projects

655

Project Window

656

Project Inspector
Editing Files in a Project

657
658

Project Search Paths

659

Open Actions

660

Max for Live Device Projects

660

Projects collect and organize dependencies associated with a patcher or set of patches. These
dependencies can include patches, media files, code, and third-party externals.

Projects also extend the main Max search path. All files in a project can locate other files in the
same project.

Project-specific elements are loaded before any other files on the Max search path.
Project-specific assets don't have to be added to the main Max search path, isolating them
from other patches and Projects.
You can switch between global and Project-local assets.
Using projects lets you reduce the number of folders in Max's global search, which can
improve patcher loading and editing speed.

Creating Projects
You can start with a new empty project, or create a project from an existing patcher.

To create a new empty project, choose New Project from the File menu. This action creates a
Max Project at the location specified. By default, this is ~/Documents/Max/Projects (Mac)
or (User Folder)\My Documents\Max\Projects (Win). Projects can be saved anywhere,
but it is recommended to use the default location.

655

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

To create a project from your existing open patcher, choose Save as Project from the File
menu. This will close and re-open your patcher as a project.

Once the project is created, you don't need to save it: projects are saved automatically
as you edit them.

Project Window

1. Category header: Files in your project are automatically assigned to a category, like
"Patchers", "Media", "Code", or "Data". Categories are only shown if there are matching files
in the project.
2. Patcher opened with project: A project may contain one or more "top-level patchers". These
are displayed in bold in the Project window, and are automatically opened when the project
is loaded.
3. Dependencies: Files local to a project are shown in regular, non-italic text. Dependencies of
project files are shown in a darker color, and if those files are only found on the global Max

656

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

search path, they are shown in italics. Dependencies cannot be removed from a project from
the Project pindow.
4. Add files to Project: To add files to a project, they can be created from scratch, patchers can
be created from templates, and existing files can be added to projects. Files can be removed
by right-clicking on the file name in the Project window and selecting "Remove from
Project." Alternatively, you can highlight the name and use the backspace or delete key on
your keyboard.
5. Details view: When toggled on and a file from the list is selected, details about the file are
shown, including the name, kind and absolute path of the file. If the file is a dependency
(whether explicit or implicit), a link is shown to highlight the patchers in the file list which
use it. Also shown is whether the file is opened with the project or not.
6. Hierarchical and flat view modes: Hierarchical view lists all dependencies underneath the
file which depends on them. Flat view sorts all files, whether dependencies or not, into a flat
list.
7. Manage project: From the Manage Project menu, you can
consolidate and deconsolidate. Consolidation copies all dependencies to the local
project folder. De-consolidation removes any files which can be found on the global
Max search path from your local project directory.
archive. Similar to consolidation, archiving creates a copy of all files needed by the
project. Unlike consolidation, archiving creates a new ".maxzip" archive file that can
be saved and distributed as a single file.
build collectives and applications.
export as a Max for Live device.
8. Project settings: Open the Project Inspector window, the Project Seach Path window, or the
Open Actions text window.
9. Reload Project: Refreshes the Project window.
10. Show Project folder: Opens the project's location on disk.

Project Inspector
The Project Inspector allows you to set preferences for the project's behavior.

657

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

Always Localize Project Items: When enabled, files added to a project will always be copied
to the project's folder before being included in the project. (default = off)
Hide Project Window After Opening: When enabled (and only if the project contains
patchers which are marked "Open on Project Load"), the project window will not be visible
after the Project opens. You can open the Project window later by click on the Show
Containing Project button in the patcher's toolbar. (default = off)
Keep Project Folder Organized: When enabled, files in the project's folder are automatically
sorted into appropriate subfolders based on the file's category. (default = on)
Show Patcher Dependencies: When enabled, implicit dependencies are displayed in the
Project window. (default = on)
Development Path Type: When enabled, allows you to specify the path type for the folder
specified in the Development Path setting. Options are disabled, relative, and absolute.
Development Path: Allows you to choose a project-specific folder for development of Max
for Live projects. When set, all device files for the project will be saved to and referenced
from this location. When disabled, the project uses the global folder
~/Documents/Max 8/Max for Live Devices (Mac) or
(User Folder)\My Documents\Max 8\Max for Live Devices (Win).

Editing Files in a Project
To edit a patcher or text file from a project, double-click on the file's name in the project window.
Alternatively, right-click on the file's name in the project window and choose Open from the
contextual menu.

When editing a patcher from a project, a new icon will appear in the bottom toolbar. You can use
this icon to return to the project window from the patcher.

658

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

If you edit a patcher by opening the patcher file directly, rather than opening the parent
project first, Max won't be able to use the project context to resolve any search path
dependencies. Some dependencies may be found in the wrong location (globally rather
than project-locally), and some may not be found at all. For this reason, if you're
working with a project, be sure to open the project before editing any child patchers.

Project Search Paths
Within a project, patchers and other kinds of files may be marked either global or local. Files
marked global tell Max to use the file found on the global search path, if available. Files marked
local tell Max to use the file found on the Project's search path first, if available. You also have the
ability to publish a file to the global search path or to localize a file to your project's search path.

The project-local search path consists of:

1. Project-local folders: Projects maintain a folder on your hard drive. The contents of this
folder (and its subfolders) are preferentially searched when Max is looking for files
requested by project members. New files added to a project are created inside this folder by
default, and you can manually add files to it, too.
2. Singleton folders: Projects can reference files which are neither in the Max global search
path, nor in the project folder. When searching for files, the folders containing these
"singletons" are searched (non-recursively), as well.

659

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

3. Project search paths: Projects also maintain a list of additional folders to be searched when
locating project assets. This list works similarly to the list found in Max's File Preferences...
window, but is used only by the project.
Dependencies are always presumed to be local. If no local version can be found, the global version
will be used.

Open Actions
Project Open Actions allow you to specify what Max configuration options are loaded when
apProject opens.

In the Open Actions text edit window, you can write various messages to Max. For example,
messages such as ;dsp takeover 1 or ;max overdrive 1 will enable Scheduler in Audio
Interrupt and Overdrive, respectively. When the project is loaded (or reloaded via the Reload Project
button in the Project toolbar), the Open Actions will be executed.

Max for Live Device Projects
All Max for Live devices are projects. There are a few differences between regular Max projects and
Max for Live device projects:

The default location for Max for Live Device Projects is
~/Documents/Max 8/Max for Live Devices (Mac) or
(User Folder)\My Documents\Max 8\Max for Live Devices (Win)

Unfreezing a device will unpack the device's assets to the project's folder, rather than to the
"Unfrozen Max Device Files" folder on the Desktop.
Conflicts are now auto-resolved in favor of the Device version (although you can override
this in the Resolve Conflicts window if you need to).
The Archive... item in the Manage Project toolbar menu creates a datestamped ".zip" archive
of a frozen copy of the current device.
Freezing a device will include all files listed in the Project window (both explicit and implicit
items).

660

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Projects

Freezing a device which utilizes 3rd party externals will automatically collect and freeze the
externals for other Max platforms if they can be found in Max's (or the project's) search path. For
instance, freezing a device which uses myextern.mxe64 on Windows will include myextern.mxo
(macOS) externals if they are available. None of these need to be added explicitly to the project.

661

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Prototypes

Prototypes
Defining a Prototype

662

Applying a Prototype
Deleting a Prototype

663
663

Prototypes in Packages

663

Prototypes are configurations of object attributes that can be saved and recalled later. For example,
you might have an object like a slider that you've set up to have a certain size and to look a certain
way. You could define a prototype from that slider, and then apply that prototype to make other
sliders look the same way.

Prototypes are mostly used with UI objects, but you can use them for generic Max
objects as well. For example, you might have a Jitter object with a complex state that
you find yourself reusing often.

Defining a Prototype
With an object selected, open the Object menu and select Save Prototype... to define a new
prototype. A dialog box will appear, allowing you to give the prototype a name.

662

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Prototypes

Defining a new prototype

Applying a Prototype
Select the object to which you'd like to apply your prototype. Open the Object menu and choose
Prototype > <name> , where <name> is the name of your saved prototype. The object should

change its text and/or appearance to match your saved prototype.

Deleting a Prototype
Max prototypes are stored in files with the .maxproto extension. You can find these files the
Prototypes folder in the Max 9 Folder, which on macOS is in ~/Documents/Max 9 and on

Windows is in %USERPROFILE%\Documents\Max 9 . If you delete a .maxproto file from the
Prototypes folder, it will no longer appear in the list of prototypes for the specified object.

Prototypes in Packages
To include a prototype as part of a Package, create a folder in your package directory named
prototypes , and put any .maxproto files that you want to include into that directory. When a

663

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Prototypes

user installs your package, those prototypes will be available to them as well. This can be useful if
your package has a consistent look and feel that you want to enable other users to reproduce.

664

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Snippets

Snippets
Creating Snippets

665

Using Snippets

666

Adding Snippets to a Patcher

666

Snippet Location

668

Using Snippets with Packages

668

A Snippet is a small group of objects, saved in a special format for easy reuse. You can create
snippets from parts of a patcher that you find yourself using often, saving you the trouble of having
to recreate the objects and connections from scratch.

A snippet for a basic video display patch.

Creating Snippets
Select the objects you'd like to include in a snippet. Click the Save Snippet button in the bottom
toolbar.

665

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Snippets

Using Snippets
A dialog will appear, letting you name your snippet. Once you've saved your new snippet, you'll be
able to add it to any patcher either using the contextual menu or using the left sidebar.

Adding Snippets to a Patcher
Via the contextual menu
Right- or control-click an unlocked patcher where you'd like to paste your snippet. A contextual
menu will appear. Select Paste From > User Snippets then choose the desired snippet from the
submenu.

The Paste From menu also lets you quickly add patchers and snippets from installed
packages.

666

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Snippets

Via the left sidebar
Click on the Snippets tab in the left sidebar to open the Snippets browser.

Click to open the Snippets browser

The Snippets Browser lets you browse snippets my name or by preview image. When viewing
snippets by name, use the left column to filter by package. When viewing by preview image, use the
pop-up menu to filter by package. To filter snippets by name, use the filter text entry field at the
top of the browser.

To add a snippet to your patcher, just drag it from the browser and drop it into an unlocked patcher.

667

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Snippets

Snippet Location
Snippets are saved in the Snippets folder inside the Max 9 folder. Snippet files have the .maxsnip
extension. They are .maxpat format files that include a preview image.

You can add regular Max patcher files to the Snippets folder as well. This will add that
patcher to the Paste From section of the context menu.

Using Snippets with Packages
Packages can include snippets as well. If you're authoring a package, either for your own use or for
distribution through the Package Manager, you can add snippets to your package. Create a folder
called Snippets inside your package folder, and put whatever .maxsnip and .maxpat files you
like into that folder.

668

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Subpatchers and Encapsulation

Subpatchers and Encapsulation
Inlets and Outlets
Abstractions vs Subpatchers

670
670

Encapsulating and De-encapsulating

671

Subpatchers let you collapse a group of objects down to a single object. You can treat the
subpatcher as if it were like any other Max object, but you can also double-click on the subpatcher
object to see its contents at any time. Subpatchers can be extremely useful for managing the
complexity of large patchers, and for grouping together objects that perform a single function.

Create an empty subpatcher object by making a patcher object, which can also be abbreviated to p
, or create a subpatcher from an existing group of objects using encapsulation.

An empty subpatcher, using the abbreviated object name 'p'. The title of the subpatcher window is the first
argument of the subpatcher object.

669

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Subpatchers and Encapsulation

Inlets and Outlets
Subpatchers and abstractions handle inlets and outlets in the same way. A subpatcher will have as
many inlets or outlets as it has inlet or outlet objects. If you create a new inlet or outlet object in
your subpatcher, the parent patcher will update to include the new inlet or outlet. The order of the
inlets in the parent patcher corresponds to the order of inlets in the subpatcher. So, if you swap the
position of two inlet objects in the subpatcher, those objects will map to different inlets in the
parent subpatcher object.

The subpatcher has two inlet objects and one outlet object, so the parent subpatcher object has two inlets and one
outlet.

Just like a regular Max object, a subpatcher can add Comments to its inlets and outlets. If you set
the @comment attribute on an inlet or outlet object, then when you mouse over the inlet or outlet
you will see that text displayed.

Abstractions vs Subpatchers

670

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Subpatchers and Encapsulation

As mentioned in the article on abstractions, subpatchers are embedded within their parent, while
abstractions reference a saved .maxpat file. Changes that you make to a subpatcher only affect
that subpatcher, whereas changes to an abstraction will modify the original file, and hence all copies
of that abstraction. Abstractions can also take advantage of arguments and unique identifiers, while
subpatchers cannot.

Encapsulating and De-encapsulating
With a group of objects selected, press ⌘shifte (macOS) or CTRLshifte (Windows), or select
Encapsulate from the Edit menu to move those objects to a new subpatcher. If those objects were
connected to other objects that weren't part of the encapsulation, Max will create inlet and outlet
objects automatically, and connect the new subpatcher object in the correct way. The logic of your
patcher will always be preserved after encapsulation.

A group of objects that express the Pythagorean theorem, computing the length of the hypotenuse of a right
triangle. After encapsulation, the objects are contained in a subpatcher that implements the same logic.

It's also possible to de-encapsulate a subpatcher, copying all of the contained objects into the
parent patcher and removing the subpatcher object. Select any subpatcher and press ⌘shiftd
(macOS) or CTRLshiftd (Windows), or select De-encapsulate from the Edit menu to perform a
de-encapsulation.

671

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Subpatchers and Encapsulation

Re-initializing

It's worth mentioning that encapsulation (as well as de-encapsulation) copies the
selected objects into a new subpatcher and then deletes the original objects. The
objects in the subpatcher are new objects, meaning their internal state will be reset to
its initial value. This is a common source of confusion when starting out with Max.

672

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Templates

Templates
Using Templates

673

Creating Templates

673

Default Template

674

Templates in Packages

675

Templates are a starting point for a Max patcher. You can save any patcher as a template, and then
rather than starting from a blank patcher, you can use your saved patcher as a starting point.
Templates maintain patcher-level formatting including fonts and colors, so if you create a template
with a patcher style, the style will be included in your template.

Using Templates
Select New From Template from the File menu to see a list of saved templates, including built-in
templates. Choose a template from the list and it will open in a new patcher window.

Creating Templates
To create a template from a Max patcher, choose Create Template... from the File menu. A dialog box
will appear that contains the name of a Max template file (the default filename will be based on the
filename of the currently open Max patch).

673

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Templates

The modal dialog asks for a name for the new template.

Default Template
You can choose a template to be the default template for the whole Max application. Once you do,
any new patcher that you create will be based on that template, rather than the typical empty
patcher.

Setting a new default template
When you save a new template, you can check the Default for New Patchers checkbox to
make the saved template the new default.

674

User Guide / Reuse and Organization / Templates

If you want to make an existing template the default, set the Default Patcher Template preference in
the Preferences window. See the Default Patcher Template section in the Preferences reference for
details.

Templates in Packages
If you're authoring a Package, whether for your own use, to share with your colleagues, or to
publish to the Package Manager, you can include templates in that package as well. This can be
really useful, for example as a way to demonstrate the functionality of your package.

To add a template to your package, create a folder called templates in your package folder. Any
.maxpat files that you put in this folder will be available as templates. Once someone installs your

package, they should see your custom templates listed in the dropdown whenever they choose
File > New From Template .

675

User Guide / Scripting

Scripting

676

User Guide / Scripting / Scripting

Scripting
Identifying Objects with Scripting Name

677

thispatcher
JavaScript

678
678

Messages to Max

679

Max provides several mechanisms for Scripting the behavior of a patcher. Through scripting, you
can accomplish many of the same things that you would normally do using the mouse and keyboard,
but through an automated or programmatic mechanism. Some examples of things you could do with
scripting:

Create, delete, and connect objects
Open and close patcher files
Customize the appearance of UI objects
Walk up and down the patcher hierarchy

Identifying Objects with Scripting Name
All Max objects have an attribute called @varname , also known as the Scripting Name of the
object. This is the name by which the object can be uniquely identified within a patcher, and so no
two objects in a patcher can share a scripting name. The scripting name is usually optional, but
some objects require a scripting name. For example, any object with Parameter Mode enabled,
including all live.* UI objects, must have a scripting name.

You can use the thispatcher object to send messages to an object using its scripting name.

677

User Guide / Scripting / Scripting

Using JavaScript, you can also get a reference to an object using its scripting name.

function find_object(name) {
let obj = this.patcher.getnamed(name);
if (obj) {
post(`Found an object named ${name}\n`);
} else {
post(`No object with name ${name}\n`);
}
}

thispatcher
The thispatcher object is the object-level interface to Max's scripting capabilities. The help file for
thispatcher provides an overview of its capabilities.

JavaScript
The v8 and v8ui objects let you embed JavaScript code directly in your patcher. In addition to all of
the functionality of the JavaScript engine itself, you can also call on the Max JavaScript API to

678

User Guide / Scripting / Scripting

interact with the Max application. See JavaScript for more.

Messages to Max
Finally, you can send messages directly to the Max application itself (or to global resources that the
Max application owns, like the audio engine). This uses a special syntax with a semicolon ; at the
beginning of a message. See Controlling Max with Messages for more information, including a list of
all available messages.

679

User Guide / Scripting / External Text Editor

External Text Editor
Editing an Object's Text

680

Using an External Editor

680

Required File on Disk

681

Objects like coll, js, jsui, and node.script have an internal state that references a body of text. For
editing the state of these objects, Max has a built-in text editor. However, you can also use an
external text editor if you prefer.

Editing an Object's Text
For any objects that have some internal text, you can open the text editor for that object by doubleclicking on the object. There's also a menu command to open the text editor. For example, with a
coll object selected, choose Edit coll Object's Contents from the File menu to open the text editor. By
default, this will use Max's internal text editor.

Using an External Editor
To use an external editor, open Max's preferences and enable Always use External Text Editor.

680

User Guide / Scripting / External Text Editor

With this option enabled, Max will use whatever text editor application is the system default when
opening a given file. If you set a value for "External Text Editor", them Max will always use that
application when opening a text file.

Required File on Disk
If you've enabled Always use External Text Editor, you may see a dialog appear when you try to open
up a text-based object for editing.

681

User Guide / Scripting / External Text Editor

When using Max's internal text editor, Max can display the contents of an object as text without
creating an actual file on disk. However, when using an external text editor, Max must save an
actual file before it can open the object contents with an external editor. Choose "Yes" to save a file
on disk. After creating the file, Max will open the file in your chosen external text editor.

682

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

JavaScript
JavaScript Objects

684

jsthis

685

Arguments

686

Input

686

Special Functions

687

Output

691

Global Code and Initialization
require

691
692

Private (Local) Functions

693

Available APIs

694

JavaScript, Threading, and Priority

694

Using JavaScript, you can script the behavior of Max by writing text code. Most of the things that
you could do with a Max external, you can also do with a JavaScript object.

Receive messages from inlets
Manage internal state
Send messages to outlets
Perform custom drawing and handle mouse events
Schedule events
Query the state of the patcher
Other functions exposed through the JavaScript API

683

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

JavaScript Objects
The JavaScript family of objects v8 and v8ui (js and jsui using the older JavaScript engine) let you
define a custom Max object using JavaScript. The JavaScript code that you write to define the
behavior of your object can be loaded as a separate .js file, or embedded in your patcher.

Max is in the process of updating its JavaScript engine, and so there are currently two
engines available in Max. There is an older JavaScript engine, running version 1.8.5, as
well as a newer v8 engine. The older version is only maintained for backwards
compatibility, and in the near future the v8 engine will be a drop-in replacement for the
older engine. Developers using the old engine through the js object don't need to take
any action—when the old engine is replaced the js object will also use the v8 engine. If
you're writing new JavaScript code, use the v8 and v8ui objects to take advantage of
the new engine.

There are two JavaScript objects: v8 and v8ui. The main difference between the two is that v8 is a
simple Max object, while v8ui provides a drawing and interaction context. Use v8 to implement a
generic Max object using JavaScript, and use v8ui to implement a user interface object. You can also
replace the default drawing behavior of any UI object using the @jspainter attribute. See Custom
UI Objects for a full description of working with @jspainter and jsui.

684

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

Max also provides an object called node.script, which lets you start and interact with
Node processes from Max. Node uses JavaScript, but code running in node.script runs
in a separate process.

jsthis
Before calling into your JavaScript code, Max binds an instance of jsthis to this . Doing so puts a
number of Max-specific functions into scope. Using this is optional when referring to these
functions.

function bang() {
// The `post` function is a method of jsthis
post("hi\n");
// Using "this" is optional, but makes explicit the reference
// to the bound instance of jsthis
this.post("nice to see you\n");
}

See the JS API Docs for a full list.

Number of Inlets and Outlets
Set the number of inlets and outlets on your JavaScript object by setting the value of inlets and
outlets on jsthis .

685

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

inlets = 3; // object will have three intles
outlets = 2; // object will have two outlets
function bang() {
outlet(1, "hi"); // send "hi" out the second outlet.
}

Arguments
Arguments supplied to the js or v8 object after the filename will be passed to the JavaScript code as
arguments. These will be available in a jsthis property called jsarguments .

// The first argument will always be the name of the file
const filename = jsarguments[0];
const argumentsLength = jsarguments.length;
// Get an array of arguments supplied by the user
const userArguments = jsarguments.slice(1, argumentsLength);
// Fancy way to do the same thing with array destructuring
const [filename1, ...userArguments1] = jsarguments;

With jsui and v8ui, use the @arguments attribute to specify the argumetns to your
JavaScript code.

Input
A message received in the inlet of a v8 or v8ui object will invoke a function with the same name.
Arguments following the message name will be passed to the JavaScript function. This method

686

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

would print "1, 2, 3" in response to the message foo 1 2 3 .

function foo(a, b, c) {
post(a, b, c);
}

With v8 you can use destructuring assignment to get the arguments to the function as an array.

function foo(...args) {
post(args.length);
}

You can even get the first argument as a single value and the rest as an array.

function foo(first, ...rest) {
post(first, ...rest);
};

Special Functions
You can define a number of functions with special names to respond to specific hooks from Max.

bang
Invoked in response to a bang message.

msg_int, msg_float
Invoked in response to an integer or a float, respectively.

687

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

function msg_int(a) {
post(`received an int: ${a}\n`);
}
function msg_float(a) {
post(`received a float: ${a}\n`);
}

If you define only msg_int , any float received will be truncated and passed to msg_int . Similarly,
if only msg_float exists, an int received will be passed to the msg_float function.

list
Invoked in response to a list (a message with more than one element that starts with a number).

function list(...elements) {
post(`elements length: ${elements.length}\n`);
post(`first element: ${elements[0]}\n`);
}

anything
You can define an anything function that will run if no specific function is found to match the
message symbol received by the v8 or v8ui object. If you want to know the name of the message
that invoked the function, use the messagename property. If you want to know what inlet received
the message, use the inlet property.

function anything(...args) {
post(`message: ${this.messagename}\n`);
post(`inlet: ${this.inlet}\n`);
post(`arguments: ${args}\n`);
}

688

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

loadbang
Invoked when the patcher file containing the v8 or v8ui object is loaded. This function will not be
called when you instantiate a new v8 or v8ui object and add it to a patcher; it will only be called
when a pre-existing patcher file containing a JavaScript object is loaded.

function loadbang() {
post("loadbang\n");
}

getvalueof
Defining a getvalueof function lets your JavaScript object participate in the pattr system,
enabling Max to save the state of your JavaScript object using pattr and pattrstorage. The return
value of getvalueof can be a number , a string , an Array of number and string , or a Max
Dict.

let myvalue = 0.25
function getvalueof() {
return myvalue;
}

setvalueof
If you've defined a getvalueof function, you can define a setvalueof function to enable pattr
and related object to restore the state of your JavaScript object from a preset. Like the return value
of getvalueof , the arguments to setvalueof can be a number , a string , an Array of
number and string , or a Max Dict.

689

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

let myvalue;
function setvalueof(v) {
myvalue = v;
}

save
Defining a function called save allows your script to embed state in a patcher file containing your
JavaScript object. Max will automatically restore your saved state when the patcher is loaded.

Saving your state consists of storing a set of messages that your script will receive shortly after the
JavaScript object is recreated. These messages are stored using a special global function called
embedmessage that only works inside the save function.

Suppose you have a function cowbells that sets the number of cowbells your object currently has:

let numcowbells = 1
function cowbells(a) {
numcowbells = a
}

When the patcher containing the JavaScript object is saved, you would like to preserve the current
number of cowbells, so you define a save function as follows:

function save() {
embedmessage("cowbells", numcowbells)
}

The first argument to embedmessage is the name of the function you want to call as a string.
Additional arguments to embedmessage supply the arguments to this function. These additional

690

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

arguments will typically be the values of the state you want to save. For each call to embedmessage
, Max will call that function with the provided arguments as it restores the state of your JavaScript
object.

notifydeleted
The notifydeleted method is called when the JavaScript object is freed.

Reserved names
The v8 and v8ui objects already do something in response to the compile message. So, if you
define a function named "compile" in your JavaScript code, there will be no way to call that function
from Max. However, you can still call the function locally, from your own JavaScript code.

Output
Call the jsthis method outlet to send messages out of a given outlet.

function bang() {
outlet(0, "bang");
}

Global Code and Initialization
When the JavaScript object is loaded, Max will execute the script once from beginning to end.
Variables defined in the global scope will persist through the life of the object, and you can use
these to hold on to internal state.

691

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

let counter = 0;
function count() {
post(`count: ${++counter}`);
}

In fact, Max will attach global variables to the this context when executing functions from an
inlet. The above code is equivalent to the following.

this.counter = 0;
function count() {
this.counter++;
post(`count: ${this.counter}`);
}

During the execution of global code, the JavaScript object is still being initialized. The
object does not have any outlets, nor is it yet part of any patcher. If you want to send
messages to an outlet immediately after your JavaScript object is created, define a
loadbang function.

require
Use require to include code from other JavaScript files.

692

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

const lib = require("my-lib.js");
function call(a) {
const computedValue = lib.compute(a);
outlet(0, computedValue);
}

The included file should be a CommonJS module. To export functions and variables, it should set
the properties of exports or else replace module.exports with an object containing exported
properties.

// An example implementation of my-lib
function compute(a) {
return a + 10;
}
module.exports = {
compute: compute
};

Private (Local) Functions
If you want to use a function locally, but you don't want it to be called from Max, you can set its
local property to 1 . For example, suppose the function foo is not something we wish to expose

to the outside world.

foo.local = 1
function foo() {
post("what does Pd *really* stand for?");
}

693

User Guide / Scripting / JavaScript

Now, when we send the message foo to the JavaScript object, we see the following error in the
Max window:

error: js: function foo is private

Available APIs
Since the Max JavaScript engine is not running inside of a web browser, certain APIs may not be
available.

JSON serialization with JSON.stringify and JSON.parse are available.
Timing functions like setImmediate and setTimeout are not available. Use Task instead.
There is no DOM, so document methods like document.getElementById are not available.

JavaScript, Threading, and Priority
Max schedules events using a high priority thread for events that require high timing accuracy, like
MIDI, and a low priority thread for long-running operations like decompressing video. The
JavaScript engine in Max always executes code in the low priority thread. That means that if a
JavaScript object receives a message from a MIDI object, or from any other object that schedules
events on the high priority queue, that event will be deferred to the low priority queue.

694

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

jit.gl.lua
The 'this' Variable

696

Messages and Functions

696

OpenGL Callback Functions

698

Creating Inlets and Outlets
Inlet Detection and Data Conversion

699
700

Outlets and Data Conversion

701

Creating Jitter Objects

701

jit.matrix

702

jit.listener

703

jit.gl Functions

704

Vector Math Functions
OpenGL Bindings

708
709

Color Functions

711

jit.gl.lua embeds the Lua scripting language inside a Jitter OpenGL object. jit.gl.lua serves as both a
general purpose Lua scripting object and a 3D graphics scripting object. It is very similar to the js
object for JavaScript with the addition that OpenGL commands can be used directly. OpenGL is
what Jitter uses for 3D graphics rendering. Normally, access to the 3D drawing functionality is
wrapped in higher level jit.gl objects (e.g. jit.gl.gridshape). jit.gl.lua however exposes OpenGL
directly in its scripting environment for more precise, dynamic control over OpenGL's 3D drawing
commands.

The Lua scripting environment inside jit.gl.lua interacts with Max and Jitter in two ways: through
patcher messages and through commands from Jitter's OpenGL rendering system. If you have done
Lua scripting in other contexts, that knowledge is directly applicable to working with jit.gl.lua.
jit.gl.lua simply adds extra functionality to the standard Lua environment, and this is what is covered
in this documentation. For more information on Lua, visit the Lua homepage.

For documentation on the OpenGL commands, what they do, and how to use them, please visit the
OpenGL website. Of particular note are the OpenGL man pages, which are available for each
command. They explain what type of arguments a command requires, what it does, and any possible
errors that may arise from improper use.

695

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

The 'this' Variable
In jit.gl.lua, there is a special variable called this . this represents the jit.gl.lua object the Lua
script is running inside. Whenever you need to modify or query the properties of embedding
jit.gl.lua object, use the this variable. A common idiom when scripting with jit.gl.lua is to use the
drawto attribute of jit.gl.lua when creating other jit.gl objects. All jit.gl objects must belong to a
rendering context in order to be used. In Jitter, rendering contexts are given names, so jit.gl objects
join a rendering context using the context's name. This attribute is called drawto .

When other jit.gl objects are created in a script, they too have to belong to a context, so we
typically attach them to the same context as the jit.gl.lua object, which can be accessed by referring
to this.drawto .

Messages and Functions
Global functions in jit.gl.lua can be called by sending messages to the jit.gl.lua object. If a script
contains the code

696

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

function apply()
print( "the apply() function was called" )
end

sending the message apply to a jit.gl.lua object will call the function above. If the message is
followed by any extra strings or numbers, these will be passed as arguments to the function. While
a function can have any name and be called by a message, there are a few function names that have
special significance. There are two groups of these functions: one for handling patcher input and
another for Jitter OpenGL messages.## Patcher Interaction Functions The patcher handling, the
functions are float , int , list , loadbang , closebang , and scriptload .

697

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

function float(v)
print( "float" , v,
end
function int(v)
print( "int" , v,

"inlet" , this.last_inlet)

"inlet" , this.last_inlet)

end
function
local

list(...)
values = {...}

print( "list" , table.concat(values,
this.last_inlet)
end

", " ),

"inlet" ,

When a number is sent to a jit.gl.lua inlet, the float messages is called and passed the value.
When an integer is sent, the int message is called. Similarly, a list of values triggers the list
function with the elements of the list set as arguments to the function. The list can be captured into
a table by using the Lua idiom

-- variable arguments captured into a table
local thelist = {...}

When the patcher is loaded, the loadbang function is called, and when it is closed, the
closebang function is called. loadbang will only be called when the patcher containing the

jit.gl.lua object is called. This happens once during the patcher lifetime, so if a script is reloaded,
loadbang will not be called again. To perform any setup each time a script is loaded, use the
scriptload function.

OpenGL Callback Functions
The Opengl methods are draw , dest_changed , dest_closing . They are called in response to
events in the Jitter OpenGL rendering system. The OpenGL callback functions are used to manage
OpenGL resources and draw to the rendering destination. It is important to remember that OpenGL

698

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

commands can only be used inside the three OpenGL callback functions. Whenever a jit.gl.lua
object is asked to draw itself by the jit.gl.render object, it calls the draw function. When the draw
function is called OpenGL commands can be used to draw to the rendering destination. Any
OpenGL related attributes set on the jit.gl.lua object objet such as blend will be applied before the
draw function is called, so they can be used initialize the drawing state before any OpenGL
commands are called in the draw function.

The dest_changed and dest_closing functions on the other hand are used to manage OpenGL
resources. dest_changed is called when the OpenGL context is created and the first frame is
about to be rendered. dest_closing is called when the context is about to be destroyed. When
both functions are called, the OpenGL context is active so any OpenGL command can be used.
Typically the dest_changed function is used to create OpenGL resources such as display lists while
the dest_closing function is used to destroy them.

local

gl = require("opengl")

local

GL = gl

function dest_changed()
-- context is new
end
function

dest_closing()

-- context is closing
end
function draw()
-- draw a line
gl.Begin(GL.LINES)
gl.Vertex( -1 , 0 , 0 )
gl.Vertex( 1 , 0 , 0 )
gl.End()
end

Creating Inlets and Outlets

699

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

jit.gl.lua can have a variable number of inlets and outlets. The number of inlets and outlets are
specified by setting the inlets and outlets attriubutes respectively on the jit.gl.lua object itself.

-- 3 inlets, 2 outlets
this.inlets = 3
this.outlets = 2

Since jit.gl.lua has dynamic inlets and outlets, whenever the inlets or outlets attriubutes are
set, the change is immediately reflected in the patcher.

Inlet Detection and Data Conversion
Lua has a single number type, so integer and float inputs are both converted to a Lua number.
When an input is sent to an inlet, jit.gl.lua 's last_inlet attribute is set, allowing a script to
determine what inlet a message was sent to so that inlet-specific behaviors can be designed if
needed.

700

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

In the script above, the last_inlet attribute of jit.gl.lua is used to save the input number when it
comes in the right inlet. When input comes in the left inlet, it triggers an addition operation and the
result is sent out the outlet.

Outlets and Data Conversion
Outlets in jit.gl.lua are accessed through the outlet function. outlet takes two or more
arguments. The first argument is the outlet index with 0 as the left-most outlet. The other
arguments are the values to be sent out the outlet. Outlets can be sent both string and numerical
values. If a numerical value is an integer, jit.gl.lua will convert it to an Max integer type, otherwise it
will be a Max float type.

Creating Jitter Objects
Jitter objects can be created in a jit.gl.lua script using the jit.new function. When called,
jit.new will create and return a Jitter object. The arguments to jit.new are the classname of

the object and any additional arguments that the object's constructor might take. For example, to
create a jit.xfade object:

xfade = jit.new( "jit.xfade" )

to create a jit.gl.gridshape object:

-- classname of the object, the context name
gshape = jit.new( "jit.gl.gridshape" , this.drawto)

Once created, the messages and attributes of the object are exposed to Lua in the usual Lua
fashion. In Lua, functions belonging to an object are called using the ':' operator, which is a kind of
object-oriented syntax sugar. This operator passes the object itself in as an implicit first argument.

701

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

gshape = jit.new( "jit.gl.gridshape" , this.drawto)
function

draw()

-- use ':' to call the gridshape's draw function
-- equivalent to gshape.draw(gshape)
gshape:draw()
end

All Jitter object messages can be called this way. Attributes are acessed more like properties stored
in a table and can be accessed using the '.' operator. For example:

gshape = jit.new("jit.gl.gridshape", this.drawto)
-- set some of the gridshape's attributes
gshape.shape = "cylinder"
gshape.automatic = 0
gshape.poly_mode = { 1 , 1 }
-- set an attribute that takes a list of
values
-- print the shape attribute
print("gridshape using shape", gshape.shape)

Some attributes consist of a array of values such as gridshape's poly_mode above. These can be
set with a list of values stored in a table. When getting an array attribute, the list of values will be
returned in a table as well.

jit.matrix
There are two ways to create a jit.matrix object in jit.gl.lua. One is using the jit.new function as
described above. The other is by using the convenience jit.matrix function. Both are equivalent
in terms of functionality. The jit.matrix function takes the same arguments as are used when
creating a jit.matrix object in a patcher. The arguments are the matrix name (optional), planecount,
type, and dimensions.

702

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

-- equivalent to jit.new("jit.matrix", 4, "char", 720, 480)
mat1 = jit.matrix(4, "char" , 720, 480)
-- a named matrix
mat2 = jit.matrix( "frame" )

jit.listener
Certain Jitter objects such as jit.window send messages out an outlet in response to patcher and
user events. Since Jitter objects in scripts have no outlets, this information has to be accessed
another way. In jit.gl.lua, the jit.listener object is used to attach to an object and listen to any
notifications it may send out.

-- listener function
function wincb(event)
print(event.subjectname)
print(table.concat(event.args,
end
win = jit.new( "jit.window" ,

", " ))

"x" )

-- list to the window with wincb as the callback function
listener = jit.listener(win.name, wincb)

jit.listener takes two arguments: the name of the object to listen to and the function to call when
the listener gets notified of some information. The second argument can either be a function
directly or the name of a global function. This code is equivalent to the code above:

703

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

function wincb(event)
print(event.subjectname)
print(table.concat(event.args,

", " ))

end
win = jit.new( "jit.window" ,

"x" )

listener = jit.listener(win.name,

"wincb" )

Notice that the second argument in this code is a string naming the function to call as opposed to
the function itself.

jit.gl Functions
In addition to the low-level OpenGL bindings discussed below, jit.gl.lua has bindings to Jitterspecific OpenGL functionality for working with Jitter textures and jit.gl objects at a lower level than
usual.

-- v2 and v3 are optional
jit.gl.texcoord(v1, [v2], [v3])
-- also can take a table
jit.gl.texcoord({v1, [v2], [v3]})

jit.gl.texcoord creates multi-texturing texture coordinates so that if there are textures bound

on different units, they will each get texture coordinates to be properly displayed on the geometry.

704

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

local gl = require( "opengl" )
local GL = gl
function draw()
gl.Color( 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 )
jit.gl.bindtexture( "tex1" ,

0 )

jit.gl.bindtexture( "tex2" , 1 )
gl.Begin(GL.QUADS)
jit.gl.texcoord( 0 , 0 ) gl.Vertex( -1 , -1 , 0 )
jit.gl.texcoord( 1 , 0 ) gl.Vertex( 1 , -1 , 0 )
jit.gl.texcoord( 1 ,
jit.gl.texcoord( 0 ,
gl.End()

1 ) gl.Vertex( 1 , 1 , 0 )
1 ) gl.Vertex( -1 , 1 , 0 )

jit.gl.unbindtexture( "tex2" ,
jit.gl.unbindtexture( "tex1" ,
end

1 )
0 )

jit.gl.bindtexture(texname, texunit)
-- draw some geometry
jit.gl.unbindtexture(texname, texunit)

jit.gl.bindtexture and jit.gl.unbindtexture are used to bind and unbind texture. The first

argument is a texture name and the second argument is the texture unit to assign the texture to.
Every graphics card has a fixed number of slots called texture units. The number of texture units a
card has determines how many textures can be used simultaneously. This number is usually 8 but
can be 16 or even 32. To see how many texture units your card has, go to the Options Menu >
OpenGL Status. Under the OpenGL Limits > Textures item, you'll see MAX_TEXTURE_UNITS and a
value next to it. This is the number of texture units your card supports.

jit.gl.begincapture(texname)
-- draw some geometry
jit.gl.endcapture(texname)

705

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

jit.gl.begincapture and jit.gl.endcapture are used to render drawing commands to a

texture instead of to a window. The only argument is the texture name.

local gl = require( "opengl" )
local GL = gl
local

pi = math.pi

local tex = jit.new( "jit.gl.texture" , this.drawto)
tex.dim = {1024, 1024}
function draw()
-- capture to texture
jit.gl.begincapture(tex.name)
gl.Color( 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 )
gl.Begin(GL.LINES)
for i= 0 , pi, pi/ 100 do
gl.Vertex(math.cos(i), math.sin(i* 2.4 ))
gl.Vertex(math.cos(i+pi), math.sin(i* 2.4 +pi))
end
gl.End()
-- end capturing to texture
jit.gl.endcapture(tex.name)
-- draw the result
gl.Color( 1 , 1 , 1 , 1 )
jit.gl.bindtexture(tex.name,
gl.Begin(GL.QUADS)
gl.TexCoord( 0 ,
gl.TexCoord( 1 ,
gl.TexCoord( 1 ,
gl.TexCoord( 0 ,
gl.End()

0 )

0 ) gl.Vertex( -1 , - 1 , 0 )
0 ) gl.Vertex( 1 , - 1 , 0 )
1 ) gl.Vertex( 1 , 1 , 0 )
1 ) gl.Vertex( -1 , 1 , 0 )

jit.gl.unbindtexture(tex.name,
end

0 )

706

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

-- arguments can be either a table or list of values
screenpos = jit.gl.worldtoscreen(worldpos)
-- arguments can be either a table or list of values
worldpos = jit.gl.screentoworld(screenpos)

jit.gl.worldtoscreen converts world coordinates into screen coordinates.
jit.gl.screentoworld performs the inverse operation, converting screen coordinate into world

coordinates. Both functions can take either a table of values or a list of x, y, z values. The zcoordinate in jit.gl.screentoworld is typically a value in the range [0, 1] where 0 represents the
near clipping plane and 1 the far clipping plane, which can be used to cast a ray into the OpenGL
scene as the code below demonstrates:

function castray(x, y)
local raystart = jit.gl.screentoworld(x, y, 0 )
local rayend = jit.gl.screentoworld(x, y, 1 )
return raystart, rayend
end

jit.gl.draw_begin(jit_gl_object)
jit.gl.draw_end(jit_gl_object)

jit.gl.draw_begin and jit.gl.draw_end operate on jit.gl objects. All jit.gl objects share a set

of common attributes know as ob3d (or object 3D) attributes. Whenever a jit.gl object draws itself,
it sets up the OpenGL state to reflect the settings of its attributes such as depth_enable and
blend among others. When an object is drawn, the following sequence of calls takes place:

707

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

draw_begin(ob3d)
draw(ob3d)
draw_end(ob3d)

Sometimes it's useful to have explicit control over this sequence of calls within a jit.gl.lua script and
jit.gl.draw_begin and jit.gl.draw_end enable this kind of control. jit.gl.draw_begin

sets up OpenGL state based on the object's ob3d attributes while jit.gl.draw_end reverses the
process. These calls must be used in pairs, otherwise OpenGL errors may occur.

gshape = jit.new( "jit.gl.gridshape" , this.drawto)
gshape.automatic = 0
function draw()
-- equivalent to gshape:draw()
jit.gl.draw_begin(gshape)
gshape:drawraw()
jit.gl.draw_end(gshape)
end

Vector Math Functions
The vector math functions in jit.gl.lua are located in the vec module and are organized into six
categories. These categories are:- vec.vec2

vec.vec3
vec.vec4
vec.quat
vec.mat3
vec.mat4 For more detailed documentation on the vec module, see the jit.gl.lua Vector
Math Overview.

708

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

OpenGL Bindings
Detailed documentation on each function in the OpenGL module can be found on the jit.gl.lua
OpenGL Bindings page. There are also bindings for the OpenGL Utility (GLU) functions at jit.gl.lua
OpenGL GLU Bindings. This section describes common usage and techniques.

The OpenGL bindings in jit.gl.lua enable direct access to OpenGL commands. Nearly all of the
OpenGL commands are available through the bindings. Wherever possible the arguments to an
OpenGL function in Lua match the arguments described in the OpenGL man page for that
command. Since OpenGL is a C interface, type information and the number of arguments a
command must take are fixed. Lua does not have this restriction, so in an effort to simplify the
interface into OpenGL, functions that only vary based on type and the number of arguments have
been collapsed into a single function. For example, the OpenGL command for specifiying a vertex of
geometry as the following variations:

void glVertex2s(GLshort x, GLshort y);
void glVertex2i(GLint x, GLint y);
void glVertex2f(GLfloat x, GLfloat y);
void glVertex2d(GLdouble x, GLdouble y);
void glVertex3s(GLshort x, GLshort y, GLshort z);
void glVertex3i(GLint x, GLint y, GLint z);
void glVertex3f(GLfloat x, GLfloat y, GLfloat z);
void glVertex3d(GLdouble x, GLdouble y, GLdouble z);
void glVertex4s(GLshort x, GLshort y, GLshort z, GLshort w);
void glVertex4i(GLint x, GLint y, GLint z, GLint w);
void glVertex4f(GLfloat x, GLfloat y, GLfloat z, GLfloat w);
void glVertex4d(GLdouble x, GLdouble y, GLdouble z, GLdouble w);

In Lua, all of the variations are contained within a single function:

709

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

-- The same function, different number of arguments
gl.Vertex(x, y)
gl.Vertex(x, y, z)
gl.Vertex(x, y, z, w)

In OpenGL, enumerations play an important role for specifying different modes of behavior. An
enumeration is simply a number with a particular meaning. For example, OpenGL has a lot of
functionality that can be enabled and disabled such as depth testing, blending, etc. To enable or
disable a particular bit functionality, an enumeration specifiying the functionality is passed to the
glEnable or glDisable command. In C this looks like:

glEnable(GL_DEPTH_TEST);
glDisable(GL_BLEND);

The Lua bindings for OpenGL also have enumerations. These are stored in the same location as all
of the OpenGL functions, which is simply a giant table. Often times it is convenient to have the Lua
code look as much like the C code as possible so that when copying example code or switching
between C and Lua there is minimal cognitive overhead. We can do this by aliasing the OpenGL
module table to the variable 'GL'. When jit.gl.lua loads a script, it autmatically makes available the
opengl table, which contains all of the OpenGL functions and enumerations. The following idiom
allows us to write code that more closely resembles C-style OpenGL code:

710

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

-- set the OpenGL module to the variable 'gl'
local gl = require( "opengl" )
-- alias the OpenGL module to the variable 'GL' to emulate the C
enumeration style
local GL = gl
function draw()
gl.Enable(GL.DEPTH_TEST)
gl.Disable(GL.BLEND)
-- draw some geometry
end

Color Functions
In addition to the OpenGL module, jit.gl.lua also has a color module built in. The color module
contains funtions for translating betwee RGB space and Hue-Saturation-Luminance (HSL) space. It
also contains a large number of pre-defined color values. The color values are given in RGB form.
Here are some examples:

chocolate = { 0.823529 , 0.411765 , 0.117647 }
lightcoral = { 0.941176 , 0.501961 , 0.501961 }
slateblue = { 0.415686 , 0.352941 , 0.803922 }

There are 115 colors in total. For the full list, see the jit.gl.lua Color Bindings documentation. The
main functions in the color module are RGBtoHSL and HSLtoRGB . While colors in both spaces are
defined by three values, an optional fourth value representing the alpha channel can also be passed
in. The alpha channel is not involved in any of the calculations, but is simply passed through
untouched.

711

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

hsl = RGBtoHSL(rgb)
hsl = RGBtoHSL(r, g, b)
hsla = RGBtoHSL(rgba)
hsla = RGBtoHSL(r, g, b, a)
rgb = HSLtoRGB(hsl)
rgb = HSLtoRGB(h, s, l)
rgba = HSLtoRGB(hsla)
rgba = HSLtoRGB(h, s, l, a)

For example, the code below converts an RGBA color to an HSLA color, lightens it, and then gets
back the result into RGBA space.

color = { 1 , 0.2 , 0.2 ,
hsla = RGBtoHSL(color)
-- lighten the color

0.5 }

hsla[ 3 ] = hsla[ 3 ]* 1.1
color = HSLtoRGB(hsla)

The other three functions in the color module are for manipulating HSL colors. They are designed so
that the color manipulation functions can be chained without having to assign any results to a
variable. These functions are hue , saturate , and lighten .

res = hue(hsla, hue_offset)
res = saturate(hsla, saturation_scale)
res = lighten(hsla, luminance_scale)

hue offsets the hue of an HSLA color by a given amount. saturate and lighten scale the

saturation and luminance components of an HSLA color respective.

712

User Guide / Scripting / jit.gl.lua Overview

-- lighten the color
color = HSLtoRGB(lighten(RGBtoHSL{ 1 ,

0.2 ,

0.2 ,

0.5 },

1.1 ))

713

User Guide / Scripting / The define Message

The define Message
Using define

714

Recovering the Original

716

Storing Your define in a Package

717

The define message to the max object (see Controlling Max with Messages) lets you declare an
object that loads a file of code for one of Max's powerful supported language-based objects:
JavaScript (v8), Gen, and jit.gl.slab.

Once defined the object can have its own help file and reference page and will appear in object box
autocompletion.

The define message was used to create the jit.fx series of shader-based effects using a combination
of v8 and jit.gl.slab.

Using define
Text Substitution

For this example we are including the leading semicolon needed if you are entering a
message to max in a message box. Later when you create a text file with your defines in
it, you will omit the leading semicolon.

Suppose you have a JavaScript file called mycode.js. Here's how you can use the define message so
that merely typing mycode will create a v8 object with mycode.js as an argument.

; max define mycode v8 mycode.js

714

User Guide / Scripting / The define Message

The word after define is the name of the object you'll type into an object box, in this case
mycode . Everything after that will become the actual contents of the object box, but it's not

substituted for the text you type in; instead it's hidden in the background.

Arguments
Any arguments you type after the defined object name will be appended after the specified
subtitution text. For example, if you typed mycode 1 2 3 the resulting object box (which remains
a secret) contains v8 mycode.js 1 2 3 .

Typed-in Attribute Handling
It's also possible to specify preset values for typed-in attributes. To continue with our JavaScript
example, imagine that mycode.js declares two attributes:

declareattribute("attr1");
declareattribute("attr2");
declareattribute("attr3");

You can set the initial values for any of these attributes as part of your define.

; max define mycode v8 mycode.js @attr1 25 @attr2 freedie

If the user of your define also adds arguments to their use of the define, those are substituted after
the arguments in the define (in this case, mycode.js ) but before the typed-in attribute values. With
the above define, mycode 1 2 3 would produce
v8 mycode.js 1 2 3 @attr1 25 @attr2 freddie

Finally, if the user of your define includes typed-in attributes, those are placed at the very end. And,
if they supply values for attributes already in the define, the user's attribute values are used instead
of the ones in the define. As an example, if the user enters mycode 1 2 3 @attr3 1000 the
resulting object will be created with

715

User Guide / Scripting / The define Message

v8 mycode.js 1 2 3 @attr1 25 @attr2 freddie @attr3 1000 . And if the user enters
mycode 1 2 3 @attr1 50 @attr3 1000 the result will be
v8 mycode.js 1 2 3 @attr1 50 @attr2 freddie @attr3 1000 .

For Gen, typed-in attributes set the initial values of Gen param objects.

Inspector Behavior
In order to put the focus on the settings the user can change, Gen, v8, and jit.gl.slab hide certain
attributes in the inspector when you are using a define. For example, you typically can't read in a
different file.

Recovering the Original
To recover the original object and arguments used to create an object using define, use the Object
Action Menu and Transform > Convert Define to Arguments.

As an example, after using Convert Define to Arguments, the jit.fx.threshold object becomes a
jit.gl.slab hosting the shader file jit.fx.threshold.jxs .

716

User Guide / Scripting / The define Message

Storing Your define in a Package
Currently, the best way to create permanent access to a define is to use packages. Here is the
recommended folder structure for a package that uses this feature:

package_folder/
├── init/
│
└── text file with max define messages
└── code/
├── JavaScript files
├── Shader files
└── Gen files

The text file that will be stored in the init folder should end in .txt . Omit the leading semicolon
required by the message box but include a trailing semicolon at the end of your message.

max define mycode v8 mycode.js @attr1 25 @attr2 freedie;
max define yourcode v8 yourcode.js;

After your package is assembled, copy it into the Max Packages folder. To test, relaunch Max, wait
for the database to rebuild (as indicated in the left toolbar) and try typing your define into an object
box. It should be displayed in autocompletion after typing the first two or three characters.

717

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Controlling Max with Messages
Messages to max

718

MIDI Configuration Messages

743

Messages to midi

748

Messages to dsp
Messages to jitter

750
755

Just like you can control objects by sending them messages, you can also send messages directly to
the Max application. This lets you do things like:

Get/set the value of various Max Preferences
List all of the currently loaded Max externals
Move the mouse cursor
Hide/show the menu bar
To send a message directly to Max, create a message box starting with a semicolon followed by the
symbol max , jitter , or dsp , to send a message directly to max itself, the Jitter engine, or the
audio engine. You don't need to connect the message box to anything, simply trigger it to send the
message.

Messages boxes beginning with a semicolon send their message directly to the Max application

Messages to max
buildcollective
Builds a collective using a patcher previously opened with openfile. The collective is named with the
output filename. The filename should be a full path (e.g. Desktop/somecollective.mxf ), and it

718

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

must have the .mxf extension.

; max buildcollective patchername outputfile

Name

Type

Description

patchername

symbol

The symbol associated with the patcher that should be bundled into a
collective

outputfile

symbol

Name of the output file

checkpreempt
Sends the current Overdrive mode to a receive object

; max checkpreempt $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

clean
Clear the dirty flag, causing Max not to show a Save Changes dialog when you close a window or
quit, even if there are patchers that have been modified. This is useful in conjunction with the quit
message below.

; max clean

clearmaxwindow

719

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Clear the Max Console.

; max clearmaxwindow

closefile
Closes a patcher file previously opened with the openfile

; max closefile $patchername

Name

Type

Description

patchername

symbol

Symbol associate with the file

crash
Terminate Max, generating a standard crashlog. When relaunched, The Max application will perform
standard crash recovery (if crash recovery is enabled in the Max preferences).

; max crash

db.exportmetadata
Write the metadata information currently stored in the database to a file. An optional argument can
be used to specify a filename. If no filename is specified, the metadata is backed up to a file in your
preferences folder.

; max db.exportmetadata $filename

720

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

filename

symbol

(optional) backup file filename

db.importmetadata
Load metadata information from a previously stored file into the Max database. An optional
argument can be used to specify a filename - when no argument is specified, Max will look for a
backup file from a previous call to db.exportmeta in your preferences folder.

; max db.importmetadata $filename

Name

Type

Description

filename

symbol

(optional) backup file filename

db.reset
Rebuild the internal database, used by the File Browser and others.

; max db.reset

debug
Enable/disable sending Max's internal debugging output to the Max Console. This debug
information may be of limited use for anyone who isn't debugging Max itself.

; max debug $onoff

721

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

0 or 1 to enable/disable debug messages

disablevirtualmididestinations
Activate to disable the creation of virtual sources by the Core MIDI driver. When set to zero
(enabling virtual sources) the virtual sources are created again.

; max disablevirtualmididestinations $offon

Name

Type

Description

offon

number

0 or 1 to disable/enable virtual sources

enablepathcache
Enable/disable Max's search path cache. This should only be done if you notice unusual behavior
when opening files.

; max enablepathcache $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

0 or 1 to enable/disable path cache

externaleditor
Sets the text editor used for editing text file content, such as saved coll files, text files and
JavaScript code.

722

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max externaleditor $editorname

Name

Type

Description

editorname

symbol

Name of the external text editor

externs
Print all of the external objects currently loaded to the Max Console.

; max externs

fileformat
Associate a filename extension with a particular four-character filetype. For example, the message
max fileformat .tx TEXT associates the extension .tx with TEXT (text) files. This allows a user

to send a message read george and locate a file with the name george.tx . It also ensures that
files with the extension .tx will appear in a standard open file dialog where text files can be
chosen.

; max fileformat extension filetype

Name

Type

Description

extension

symbol

File extension to associate with a character code

filetype

symbol

Filetype character code

fixwidthratio

723

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Set the ratio of the box to the width of the text when the user chooses Fix Width from the Object
menu. The default value is 1.0. A value of 1.1 would make boxes wider than they needed to be, and
a value of 0.9 would make boxes narrower than they need to be.

; max fixwidthratio $ratio

Name

Type

Description

ratio

number

box width to text width ratio

getarch
Send the currently running Max architecture (always 'x64') to the named receive object.

; max getarch $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getdefaultpatcherheight
Send the current default patcher height in pixels to the named receive object (See also the
setdefaultpatcherheight message to Max.)

; max getdefaultpatcherheight $receive

724

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getdefaultpatcherwidth
Send the current default patcher width in pixels to the named receive object (See also the
setdefaultpatcherheight message to Max.)

; max getdefaultpatcherwidth $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getenablepathcache
Report whether the path cache is enabled to the named receive object. (See also the
enablepathcache message to Max.)

; max getenablepathcache $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

geteventinterval
Report the event interval to the named receive object. (See also the seteventinterval message to
Max.)

725

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max geteventinterval $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getfixwidthratio
Report the current fix width ratio value to the named receive object. (See also the fixwidthratio
message to Max.)

; max getfixwidthratio $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getpollthrottle
Report the current poll throttle value to the named receive object. (See also the setpollthrottle
message to Max.)

; max getpollthrottle $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getqueuethrottle

726

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Report the current queue throttle value to the named receive object. (See also the setqueuethrottle
message to Max.)

; max getqueuethrottle $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getrefreshrate
Report the current refresh rate in frames per second (fps) to the named receive object. (See also the
refreshrate message to Max.)

; max getrefreshrate $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getruntime
Send a 1 to the named receive object if the current version of Max is a runtime version, and a 0 if
not.

; max getruntime $receive

727

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getslop
Send the scheduler slop value to the named receive object. (See also the setslop message to Max.)

; max getslop $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getsysqelemthrottle
Send the maximum number of patcher UI update events processed at a time to the named receive
object. (See also the setsysqelemthrottle message to Max.)

; max getsysqelemthrottle $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getsystem
Send the name of the system (macintosh or windows) to the named receive object.

; max getsystem $receive

728

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

getversion
Send the Max version number as a decimal value, which needs to be converted to a hexidecimal
value (e.g. Max version 7.3.4 is reported as '1844'), and output from the named receive object.

; max getversion $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

hidecursor
Hides the cursor if it is visible.

; max hidecursor

hidemenubar
Hides the menu bar.

; max hidemenubar

htmlref

729

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Look for a file called <filename>.html in the search path. If found, a web browser is opened to
view the page. This opens local html files, not remote web addresses.

; max htmlref $filename

Name

Type

Description

filename

symbol

Name of the file to open

launchbrowser
Opens a web browser to view the given URL.

; max launchbrowser $url

Name

Type

Description

url

symbol

URL to open

maxcharheightforsubpixelantialiasing
Set a threshold font size (in points) for native subpixel aliasing. Since the look of subpixel
antialiasing may be undesirable when working with large fonts as compared to regular antialiasing,
this attribute lets you specify a threshold font size; if a font is larger than the specified size, it will
be rendered using regular rather than subpixel antialiasing.

Note that Max honors your computer's system preferences - Max won't use subpixel aliasing if
you've disabled it for your system. Setting this attribute value to zero value is 0 will always use
regular antialiasing, and setting a very high value will always use subpixel antialiasing (unless it is
disabled in system preferences).

730

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max maxcharheightforsubpixelantialiasing $pointheight

Name

Type

Description

pointheight

number

threshold font size (in points) for native subpixel aliasing

maxinwmenu
Enable/disable the special Status option in the Window menu bar item. This is only available when
using runtime version of Max and an active custom menubar object. The Status option will allow
users to see the Max Console. Defaults to 1 (enabled).

; max maxinwmenu $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable the Status option to show the Max Console

maxwindow
Displays the Max Console. If the Max Console if not currently open, the window will be displayed. If
the window is currently open, it will bring it to the front.

; max maxwindow

midilist
Prints the names of all current MIDI devices in the Max Console. (See also MIDI Messages to Max,
below.)

731

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max midilist

notypeinfo
(macOS only) Enable/disable saving files with traditional macOS four-character type information. By
default, Max does save this information in files.

; max notypeinfo $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable saving files with traditional macOS four-character type
information

objectfile
The word objectfile, followed by two symbols that specify an object name and a file name, Create a
mapping between an external object and its filename. For example, the *~ object is in a file called
times~ so at startup Max executes the command max objectfile *~ times~ .

; max objectfile objectname filename

Name

Type

Description

objectname

symbol

Name of the object to associate

filename

symbol

External object filename to associate

openfile

732

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

The word openfile, followed by two symbols that specify an reference name and a file name or path
name, attempts to open the patcher with the specified name. If successful, the patcher is associated
with the reference symbol, which can be passed as argument to the buildcollective and closefile
messages to Max. The openfile message is intended for batch collective building.

; max openfile namehandle filename

Name

Type

Description

namehandle

symbol

Name to associate with the open patcher

filename

symbol

Name of the patcher to open

paths
List the current search paths in the Max Console. There is a button in the File Preferences window
that does this.

; max paths

preempt
Toggle Overdrive mode.

; max preempt $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable overdrive

733

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

pupdate
Move the mouse cursor to a global screen position.

; max pupdate xposition yposition

Name

Type

Description

xposition

number

Horizontal screen coordinate

yposition

number

Vertical screen coordinate

purgemididevices
Purge the missing MIDI device cache. Max maintains a cache of the MIDI Setup settings for known,
but detached MIDI devices. Send this message to 'forget' any missing devices.

; max purgemididevices

quit
Quit the Max application, equivalent to choosing Quit from the File menu. If there are unsaved
changes to open files, and you haven't sent Max the clean message, Max will ask whether to save
changes.

; max quit

refresh
Update all Max consoles.

734

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max refresh

refreshrate
Set the rate limit, in frames per second, at which the UI for user interface objects is updated. Better
visual performance can be achieved - at the cost of a slight performance decrease in Jitter, and little
or no performance decrease for audio processing - by specifying a higher frame rate.

; max refreshrate $rate

Name

Type

Description

rate

number

Refresh rate (fps)

relaunchmax
Close and relaunch the Max application.

; max relaunchmax

runtime
Conditionally send a message to Max if the given value matches the "runtime" status of Max. For
example, the message ; max runtime 0 externs will send the externs message to Max only if
the active Max application is not a runtime-only version.

; max runtime runtimeflag message

735

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

runtimeflag

number

Flag to match for the current runtime status

message

symbol

Message to send if the runtime flag matches

sendinterval
Send the current scheduler interval to the named receive object.

; max sendinterval $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

sendapppath
Send the path of the Max application to the named receive object.

; max sendapppath $receive

Name

Type

Description

receive

symbol

Name of the target receive object

setdefaultpatcherheight
Set the default patcher height in pixels. Must be greater than 100.

736

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max setdefaultpatcherheight $height

Name

Type

Description

height

symbol

Default patcher height

setdefaultpatcherwidth
Set the default patcher width in pixels. Must be greater than 100.

; max setdefaultpatcherwidth $width

Name

Type

Description

width

symbol

Default patcher width

seteventinterval
Set the time between invocations of the event-level timer (The default value is 2 milliseconds). The
event-level timer handles low priority tasks like drawing user interface updates and playing movies.

; max seteventinterval $interval

Name

Type

Description

interval

symbol

Low priority timer interval

setmixergbitmode

737

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Set the state of the Enable Mixer Crossfade preference for top-level patcher mixers. A value of 0
sets the preference to Off , 1 to On , and 2 to Auto .

; max setmixergbitmode $mode

Name

Type

Description

mode

number

Enable Mixer Crossfade preference

setmixerlatency
Set the Mixer Crossfade Latency preference for top-level patcher mixers to the specified number of
milliseconds.

; max setmixerlatency $latency

Name

Type

Description

latency

number

Mixer latency in milliseconds

setmixerparallel
Enable/disable the Enable Mixer Parallel Processing preference for top-level patcher mixers.

; max setmixerparallel $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable mixer parallel processing

738

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

setmixerramptime
Set the Mixer Crossfade Ramp Time preference for top-level patcher mixers to the specified
number of milliseconds.

; max setmixerramptime $time

Name

Type

Description

time

number

Ramp time in milliseconds

setmirrortoconsole
Enable/disable mirroring of Max Console posts to the system console (default off). The system
console is available on macOS using Console.app, or on Windows using the DbgView program (free
download from Microsoft).

; max setmirrortoconsole $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable mirror to system console

setsleep
Set the time between calls to get the next system event, in 60ths of a second. The default value is
2.

; max setsleep $interval

739

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

interval

number

Interval in 60ths of a second between system event polls

setpollthrottle
Set the maximum number of events the scheduler executes each time it is called (The default value
is 20). Setting this value lower may decrease accuracy of timing at the expense of efficiency.

; max setpollthrottle $chunksize

Name

Type

Description

chunksize

number

Number of events the executed per scheduler tick

setqueuethrottle
Set the maximum number of events handled at low-priority each time the low-priority queue
handler is called (The default value is 2). Changing this value may affect the responsiveness of the
user interface.

; max setqueuethrottle $chunksize

Name

Type

Description

chunksize

number

Number of events executed per low-priority queue handler tick

setslop
Set the scheduler slop value - the amount of time a scheduled event can be earlier than the current
time before the time of the event is adjusted to match the current time. The default value is 25
milliseconds.

740

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max setslop $slop

Name

Type

Description

slop

number

Slop time in milliseconds

setsysqelemthrottle
Set the maximum number of patcher UI update events to process at a time. Lower values can lead
to more processing power available to other low-priority Max processes, and higher values make
the user interface more responsive (especially when using many bpatchers).

; max setsysqelemthrottle $chunksize

Name

Type

Description

chunksize

number

Number of patcher UI events to process per tick

showcursor
Show the cursor if it is hidden.

; max showcursor

showmenubar
Show the menu bar if it was hidden with hidemenubar

741

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max showmenubar

size
Print the number of symbols in the symbol table in the Max Console.

; max size

system
Conditionally send a message to Max if the Operating System condition matches. The operating
system can be windows or macintosh . For example, the message
; max system windows externs will send the message externs to Max only on a Windows

operating system.

; max system systemflag message

Name

Type

Description

systemflag

number

Flag to match for the current operating system windows or
macintosh

message

symbol

Message to send if the system flag matches

useexternaleditor
Enable/disable using an external editor for text. If enabled, any situation where an external editor
can be used will launch the editor. If disabled, an external editor will only be used when selected
from the menu.

742

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; max useexternaleditor $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable the external editor

useslowbutcompletesearching
Enable/disable complete file searching. When enabled, it causes files not found in Max's cache of
the search path to be searched in the file system. This is necessary only in extremely rare cases
where the file cache does not update properly. One such case is copying a file into the search path
using a version of the Mac OS prior to 10.5.5 over a network. This option may cause patcher files to
be loaded more slowly. The setting defaults to off with each launch of the application, and is not
stored in the user's preferences.

; max useslowbutcompletesearching $onoff

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable the complete file searching

MIDI Configuration Messages
createoutport
Creates a new port for the specified driver. This is only possible on macOS machines. Windows is
unsupported. On macOS, specifying the coremidi driver name creates a virtual output port you
can use to communicate with other MIDI applications, while specifying the augraph driver name
creates another port exclusively assigned to the DLS synthesizer.

743

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

;#SM createoutport portname drivername

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port to create

drivername

symbol

Name of the driver to create

deleteoutport
On macOS, deletes a port created with the createoutport message. drivername and portname
should be the same as the arguments originally passed to createoutport .

;#SM deleteoutport portname drivername

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port to delete

drivername

symbol

Name of the driver to delete

driver loadbank
On macOS, loads a type 1 or 2 DLS Bank, where filename is the name of an existing DLS bank
file, and portname is the name of the port that will use this bank. If portname is omitted, all DLS
ports will use the bank. The folder /Library/Audio/Sounds/Banks is added to the search path
when looking for a DLS bank file.

;#SM driver loadbank filenaem portname

744

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

filename

symbol

Name of the DLS bank file to load

portname

symbol

Name of the port that will use the bank

driver loadbank 0
Load the default General MIDI DLS bank

;#SM driver loadbank 0 $portname

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port that will use the bank

driver reverb
Enable/disable reverb. Off by default in augraph

;#SM driver reverb onoff portname

Name

Type

Description

onoff

number

Enable/disable reverb

portname

symbol

Name of the port

driver latency
(midi_mme only) Set the MIDI Output Latency in milliseconds

745

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

;#SM driver latency mstime portname

Name

Type

Description

mstime

number

Latency in milliseconds

portname

symbol

Name of the port

inportinfo
Send information about MIDI input ports to the named receive objects. The information is
contained in an list message with the following elements:

Element

Type

the port's name

symbol

the port's driver name

symbol

the port's unique ID

int

the port's abbreviation

int

the port's channel offset

int

whether the port is enabled or disabled

one if enabled, zero if disabled

whether the port was created dynamically

one if yes, zero if no

;#SM inportinfo portname receivename

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port

receivename

symbol

Name of the target receive object

746

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

outportinfo
Send information about MIDI output ports to the named receive objects. The information is
contained in an infolist list message. See inportinfo for a description if the infolist list
elements.

;#SM outportinfo portname receivename

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port

receivename

symbol

Name of the target receive object

createinport
(macOS only) Add a virtual MIDI input port, where portname is the name you assign to the port,
and drivername should be set to coremidi . Other MIDI applications can send messages to Max
using this port.

;#SM createinport portname drivername

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port to create

drivername

symbol

Name of the driver, should always be coremidi

deleteinport
Deletes a port created with the createinport message. drivername and portname should be the
same as the arguments originally passed to createinport .

747

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

;#SM deleteinport portname drivername

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port to create

drivername

symbol

Name of the driver, should always be coremidi

Ports created with the createoutport and createinport messages are not saved as
a part of your MIDI setup preferences.

Messages to midi
These are technically messages to Max, but specifically to MIDI configuration object owned by
Max. So to send one of these messages, use a format like:

; max midi <message> <message-arguments>

portabbrev
Set the abbreviation for a given MIDI port.

; max midi portabbrev inorout portname $abbrev

748

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

inorout

symbol

Must be innum for an input port or outnum for an output port

portname

symbol

Name of the port

abbrev

number

The abbrevation to use for the port. 0 is for no abbrev (- in menu), 1 for
'a' and 26 for 'z'.

portenable
Enable/disable a given MIDI port. All ports are enabled by default.

; max midi portenable portname onoff $inorout

Name

Type

Description

portname

symbol

Name of the port

onoff

number

1 for enable, 0 for disable

inorout

number

1 for output, 0 for input

portoffset
Similar to portabbrev, but offset is the channel offset added to identify input or output ports when
a MIDI object can send to or receive from multiple ports by channel number. Must be a multiple of
16 (e.g. max midi portoffset innum PortA 16 sets the channel offset for PortA device to 16).

; max midi portoffset inorout portname $offset

Name

Type

Description

inorout

symbol

Must be innum for an input port or outnum for an output port

749

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

portname

symbol

Name of the port

abbrev

number

The port offset, which must be a multiple of 16.

Messages to dsp
cpulimit
Sets a utilization limit for the CPU. Above this limit, MSP will not process audio vectors until the
utilization comes back down, causing a click. If the cpu limit is set to either 0 or 100, there will be
no limit checking done.

; dsp cpulimit $limit

Name

Type

Description

limit

number

The cpu limit in a range of [0-100]

inremap
Maps a physical device input channel to a logical input channel.

; dsp inremap physical_input logical_input

Name

Type

Description

physical_input

int

Physical device input number

logical_input

int

Logical device input number

iovs

750

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Sets the I/O vector size.

; dsp iovs $size

Name

Type

Description

size

type

Vector Size, should be a power of 2

open
Opens the Audio Status window.

; dsp open

outremap
Maps a physical device output channel to a logical output channel.

; dsp outremap physical_output logical_output

Name

Type

Description

physical_output

int

Physical device output number

logical_output

int

Logical device output number

set
Turns the audio on ( 1 ) or off ( 0 ). It is equivalent to clicking on a ezadc~ or ezdac~ object.

751

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; dsp set $status

Name

Type

Description

status

int

New audio status - on / off

setdriver
Sets a new audio driver based on its index into the currently generated menu of drivers created by
he adstatus driver object.

If the argument is a symbol instead of an index and names a valid driver, the new driver is selected
by name. An additional symbol argument may be used to specify a "subdriver" (for example, ASIO
drivers use ASIO as the name of the driver and PCI-324 as a subdriver name that specifies a specific
device).

; dsp setdriver index subdriver_name

Name

Type

Description

index

int or symbol

The index or name of the driver

optional subdriver_name

int or symbol

The name of the subdriver

sigvs
Sets the I/O signal vector size.

; dsp sigvs $size

752

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

size

type

Vector Size, should be a power of 2

sr
Sets a new sampling rate in Hertz.

; dsp sr $samplerate

Name

Type

Description

samplerate

number

Samplerate in Hertz

start
Turns the audio on.

; dsp start

status
Opens the Audio Status window.

; dsp status

stop
Turns the audio off.

753

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; dsp stop

takeover
Turns Scheduler in Audio Interrupt mode on ( 1 ) or off ( 0 ). It is equivalent to clicking on the
Audio Interrupt checkbox in the Audio Status window. Overdrive must be on in order for this

change to be reflected.

; dsp takeover $status

Name

Type

Description

status

int

On ( 1 ) or off ( 0 )

timecode
Starts ( 1 ) or stops ( 0 ) timecode reading by any audio drivers that support the feature (ASIO 2).

; dsp timecode $status

Name

Type

Description

status

int

Start ( 1 ) or stop ( 0 ) reading

wclose
Closes the Audio Status window.

754

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; dsp wclose

Messages to jitter
cursor

Macintosh only

Toggles cursor visibility on / off.

; jitter cursor $status

Name

Type

Description

status

int

On ( 1 ) or Off ( 0 )

html_ref
Launches the reference file for an object in the Max search path.

; jitter html_ref $name

Name

Type

Description

name

symbol

Name of the object

755

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

javaload
Toggles Jitter Java support on / off.

; jitter javaload $status

Name

Type

Description

status

int

On ( 1 ) or Off ( 0 )

launch_browser
Launches the specified URL in the default system web browser.

; jitter launch_browser $url

Name

Type

Description

url

symbol

URL to open

menubar

Macintosh only

Toggles menubar visibility on or off. Similar to Max's showmenubar , and hidemenubar messages.

756

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

When using in conjunction with the jit.window object's fullscreen attribute, it is recommended that
the jit.window object's fsmenubar attribute is used instead of Jitter's menubar message, in order to
prevent possible "pixel trash".

; jitter menubar $status

Name

Type

Description

arg

int

On ( 1 ) or Off ( 0 )

parallel
Toggles parallel processor support. The default is on if the machine has multiple processors (or
cores), and otherwise off.

; jitter parallel $status

Name

Type

Description

arg

int

On ( 1 ) or Off ( 0 )

parallelthreads
Specifies the number of threads used for parallel processor support. Default is the number of
processors (or cores).

; jitter parallelthreads $count

757

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

Name

Type

Description

count

int

Number of threads to use

parallelthresh
Specifies matrix cellcount above which parallel processors are used. Default is 10000 cells.

; jitter parallelthresh $cellcount

Name

Type

Description

cellcount

type

Treshold at which parallel processors are used.

pollthrottle
Sets the number of scheduler events to process per scheduler tick. Equivalent to Max's
setpollthrottle message.

; jitter pollthrottle $count

Name

Type

Description

count

int

Events to process per scheduler tick

queuethrottle
Sets the number of low priority queue events to process per low priority queue service. Equivalent
to Max's setqueuethrottle message.

758

User Guide / Scripting / Controlling Max with Messages

; jitter queuethrottle $count

Name

Type

Description

count

int

Number of low priority queue events to process

759

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

REPL
Introduction

760

Accessing the REPL

760

Using the REPL

761

REPL History

763

Shortcuts

763

Patcher-Specific and Global Targets

764

receive Objects Are Global
Scripting Name Targets Are Patcher-Specific

765
766

Evaluating JavaScript

767

JS Redirection

769

Patcher Scripting with the <p> Target

769

Object Values and Attributes

770

The repl Object

770

Introduction
The Max REPL (an acronym for Read-Evaluate-Print Loop) is a text entry area at the bottom of the
Max Console that lets you interact with patchers via text commands.

Using the REPL, you can:

Send messages to Max objects in your patcher
Evaluate JavaScript expressions
Control the Max environment with text-based commands
Access the documentation

Accessing the REPL
To show the REPL, open either the sidebar Max Console or the standalone Max Console.

760

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

If the command prompt at the bottom of the Max console is not showing, click the REPL icon in the
bottom Max console toolbar to show it.

Using the REPL
Let's see a simple example of the REPL in action. Click once in the text entry box at the bottom of
the Max Console to highlight the REPL for text input. The caret will begin blinking.

Enter max printversion and press Return.

761

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

After pressing Return, you'll see max printversion posted to the Max console followed by the
current version number. For example:

What's going on in this example? The REPL is sending a message to a named object. The "read" in
this case is reading what you type. It's then "evaluating" the text you typed by sending the message.
Finally, the result of the message is (often) "printed" back to the Max console. And after reading,
evaluating, and printing, the REPL is ready for another command (the "loop").

In the above example max is the named object and printversion is the message. This simple
form -- receiver followed by message -- is the same as a message box that begins with a semicolon.

The REPL is a faster and simpler way to send messages to max and other named objects because
you don't need to create and then click on a message box, and you don't need a semicolon.

Finally, notice that after you press return, the text entry field clears, but the cursor is still blinking,
waiting for another command. This permits you to send REPL commands in quick succession.

Quick Documentation Access
Ever forget what a Max object does? The REPL can help. Enter man funnel and press Return. (If
man is too much typing, you can also use ? .) The Max window posts the following:

762

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

funnel: Identifies the inlet of incoming data. It can be used to store values into a table
or coll based on their source, or used to set a destination with an object such as spray.

REPL History
To repeat a previous command, you can use the up arrow key to scroll through the history of what
you've previously typed into the REPL. Pressing the up arrow once will enter the most recently
typed command into the REPL's text entry box, ready for you to send it again by pressing the Return
key. The down arrow scrolls the opposite direction back to the most recently typed command.
Once you pass the most recent command, pressing the down arrow will clear the text entry box.

Shortcuts
Above the text entry field of the REPL you'll see the shortcuts bar:

These shortcuts are named objects (targets) where you can send messages. Clicking on a shortcut
makes it persistent, so you can send it repeated messages without having to type the object name.
For example, click on the max shortcut. It will appear at the beginning of the text entry box:

Type printversion after the word max and press return. Now, after the version number is posted
to the Max console, max remains at the beginning of the text entry box, ready for you to send it
another command.

There are several other standard shortcuts that appear in the REPL area of the Max console:

763

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

? is the same as man, for documentation queries (currently limited to object descriptions)
_ is a way to send messages to the REPL itself
man (short for manual) is for documentation queries (currently limited to object
descriptions)
js is the global JavaScript evaluator
max is the max object; messages are documented in Controlling Max with Messages
<p> is the patcher for which this console is the sidebar (<p> does nothing in the standalone
Max console window)
+ opens a menu showing other available named object targets; if none are currently
available, the menu will not appear when you click +
Managing Shortcuts
To set the current shortcut, click on the desired name (or choose it from the + menu). It will
highlight and the text will appear at the beginning of the text entry box.

To clear the current shortcut, click its name in the shortcuts bar again. The text at the begining of
the text entry box will be removed.

To make the current named object the persistent REPL target so it doesn't go away when you pretty
Return, press Shift-Return instead.

To clear the current shortcut after sending it a message, press Option- or Alt-Return

To remove non-default shortcuts (ones you added by the + menu) from the shortcuts bar, hold
down the control key and click on the shortcut name until you see a menu that says Delete Shortcut.

Patcher-Specific and Global Targets

764

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

Two named object REPL targets already introduced are max and man . These are global targets that
work in any Max console window, whether it's the sidebar or the standalone. In fact, all the
standard shortcuts listed above are global except for <p>.

receive Objects Are Global
The name argument to a receive object is its global name. While you can have many receive objects
that share the same name in different patchers, using a send object with the same name will send
to all receive objects. The same is true for the REPL.

Make the following simple patcher:

You can use xyz as a named object target in the REPL in any Max console window, not just the
one connected to the patcher where the receive object lives.

Enter xyz 74 and press Return. The message box text will be set to 74. This does the same thing
as entering ; xyz 74 into a message box and clicking it.

Once a receive object exists in the Max environment, it will be available as a shortcut in the menu
you see by clicking +.

765

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

You can send any message to a receive object via the REPL, not just numbers. Given the above
example, xyz cat + dog will set the message box contents to cat + dog .

Note that unlike a message box, the REPL does not currently support sending multiple messages in
sequence to the same named object using commas.

Scripting Name Targets Are Patcher-Specific
In addition to receive objects, you can use the REPL to send messages to any object with a scripting
name. Here's a simple example. In a new patcher window, open the sidebar Max console. Then
return to the patcher and create new a live.dial object.

The default scripting name for a live.dial is live.dial . But we don't even have to look in the
inspector to see what it's called because having created the live.dial it will show up in the shortcut
menu under Named Objects when we click the + above the text entry area in the REPL.

Choosing ::live.dial from the + menu will make it the current shortcut (and add it to the shortcuts
bar).

766

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

Objects with scripting names are preceded with two colons (::) to distinguish them from receive
objects.

With ::live.dial are the REPL target, type 74 and press return. The dial is now set to 74.

Using a scripting name gives you direct access to an object, so you can also set its attributes and
send the object any message it understands. Let's set the dial to a deep blue color -- enter
activedialcolor 0 0 1 1 after ::live.dial and press Return.

Evaluating JavaScript
The Global js Environment
Using the special js global target, the REPL has its own JavaScript environment that can be used
for evaluating math expressions and defining variables.

When working with the JavaScript evaluator, it's helpful to click on js in the shortcut bar to make it
the current shortcut.

Here are a couple of examples of using the evaluator:

767

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

Enter js 3 + 4 and press Return. The Max console should print 7 .
Need a random number? Enter js Math.random() and press Return. You'll get a number
between 0 and 1.
You can declare a variable for later use. Enter let b = 20 and press Return. The Max
console will print undefined because there was no result for this variable assignment
operation.
Now you can retreive the variable b and use it in other expressions. For example, try
b * 100 and you should see 2000 .

In the Redirection discussion below, we'll see how you can send the result of a Javascript expression
to a named object target.

Javascript with Named v8 Objects
If you give a v8, v8ui, or v8.codebox JavaScript object a scripting name, you can use the REPL to
interact with the environment in that object using JavaScript. You can call functions defined in the
object's script or get and set the values of variables or properties.

A v8 object with a scripting name, like any other object, can be a target for Max messages. For
example, if you define a function bang inside a script in v8 object named calum you can call that
function with ::calum bang .

By using the special .js "sub-target" you can interact with the v8 object in JavaScript itself. For
example, to call the defined function bang using the .js sub-target: ::calum.js bang() .

Note the parentheses are necessary because you are not sending calum a Max message, you are
using Javascript to call a function inside the object's script itself. Similarly if you have declared a
variable at global scope in your script named bob you can print out its value with
::calum.js bob . Or you can change the value of bob with ::calum.js bob = 74 .

Everything else you can do in the global JavaScript evaluator is possible with a named v8 object and
the .js sub-target.

768

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

JS Redirection
Using the redirect operator (<) you can send the result of evaluating a JavaScript expression to a
named object. For example, we can generate a random value between 0 and 127 with
js Math.random() * 127 . Now we want to send the random value we generated using JavaScript

to a live.dial.

To set a live.dial object with scripting name ::live.dial to a random value between 0 and 127,
enter ::live.dial < js Math.random() * 127 .

The < redirects the result of the Javascript expression to become the message sent to the dial.

The result of expressions evaluated by named v8 objects can also be redirected as Max messages.
The same example as above using a v8 object with scripting name calum :
::live.dial < ::calum.js Math.random() * 127

The REPL currently supports only one redirection per line. One way to circumvent this limitation
would be to write a function in a script in a v8 object that sends its arguments out an outlet as a
Max message. This would allow you to call that function with more than one argument. For
example, to generate a random color sent to a function called sendit() , you could do something
like this: ::calum.js sendit(Math.random(), Math.random(), Math.random(), 1.0)

Patcher Scripting with the <p> Target
The REPL target <p> represents the patcher next to the sidebar Max console where you are typing
commands. It is an undefined name in the standalone Max console window.

Using the same messages you can send to the thispatcher object or the patcher object in the
JavaScript API, the REPL allows you control and script your patcher. Here are a couple of simple
examples:

769

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

To change the unlocked background color of the patcher to a dull medium gray, enter
<p> editing_bgcolor 0.5 0.5 0.5 1.0 .

To create a new button object with a scripting name, enter
<p> script newobject button @varname ddd . Now you can send the newly created

button messages such as ::ddd bang or ::ddd bgcolor 0.7 0.2 0.3 1.0

Object Values and Attributes
To change the value of an object's attribute, type the attribute name and value after the object
name. For example, to set the ignoreclick attribute of a slider with scripting name biffy :
::biffy ignoreclick 1

As a reminder, you can also change the value of the slider with ::biffy 25 .

You can use redirection to access the value of an object or one of its attributes and send that value
to another object. In this example, we have a toggle with scripting name togo that we will set with
the current value of the ignoreclick attribute of the slider named biffy . To access an attribute
of an object, use the :: notation to separate the attribute name from the scripting name.

::togo < ::biffy::ignoreclick

If have set ignoreclick in the slider to 1, after entering this command, the toggle should have a
value of 1.

To access the value of an object such as a slider, the name itself is sufficient after the redirect. In
this example, we have another slider named coppy that we want to set to the current value of
biffy :

::coppy < ::biffy

The repl Object

770

User Guide / Scripting / REPL

The repl object is an alternative to the receive object with some REPL-specific features, including
the ability to set either global or patcher-specific scope and the ability to use sub-targets.

Create a repl with a name:

Once created, the object is available as a target foo in the REPL. However, you can also append
additional names (sub-targets) to foo using dot notation. For example, foo.a 50 100 will still be
sent to the repl @name foo object.

The right outlet of repl precedes the message you send from the REPL with the target name. You
can use the target name with the route to direct messages aimed at different sub-targets to
different outlets.

771

User Guide / Sharing

Sharing

772

User Guide / Sharing / Sharing Patchers

Sharing Patchers
Copy Compressed

773

Screenshots and Image Export

774

Screen Recording

776

Projects
Tools and Abstractions

776
777

Packages

777

There are several ways to share patchers, depending on whether you want to share a large project
with multiple dependencies, or a just a small number of Max objects.

Copy Compressed
To share a small selection of objects, select the object and select Copy Compressed from the Edit
menu. This copies the objects into compressed text that can be easily shared.

In compressed form, this group of objects looks like this:

773

User Guide / Sharing / Sharing Patchers

<pre><code>
----------begin_max5_patcher---------438.3ocuUsraiCCC7r8WgfN6sPV4Uy9qTTTv3HjnBaJCI4zTTz7suRT1nY2l
GtHA6EKvwLb3Xpg4i7L9Jydkiy9M6IVV1G4YYDTDHqONi2.6qpAGkFGUuYV8
JuH8JuZumfWCUGXkL4vKZAe0VMt4Eqpxmp+iKePTvjylDOlMiBjOHXO2+Szq
oJEp9ujSGpC10nwZkmHW9EnoyOfJhfelmGeTbapvpbFjzgTbckHdLdrX4EUx
jSpjomTIk8nIH+6spDebmdCB0b1y2Oo5Ab6gqpwx4SiGStrFkmTik++z3FPi
iPLSDz.aAEr3Lh4nAuEZTdk8EEBqpo9TLdgNbYsoq1qq1BHpp2AVMf9iqz49
NTv3204sCd6vntVurL9bt3RS7x4+.+4OZhSrwq03+tUh52H9eKcmoyVMTvAC
G6qldsx40H30F73jB6WBt7gjL10J64Wkb+oV7cpKuMpkig59961XRLFlj2Al
hWxtNShuwT5JDz1tSYc8YSjD7IuZnO1KKnPMlBIuXX4+N8P9IDvFrH9f+nyR
MFe+7zeLwaLgwF1o6mbA4Enj7fXXmgqERJgrp4el+GfYabKx
-----------end_max5_patcher----------</code></pre>

If you copy this text and paste it into a patcher, Max will re-create the original objects.

You can also create a new patcher from a block of compressed text. Select New From
Clipboard from the File menu to create a new patcher using the existing contents of the
clipboard. This is especially useful for large patchers that have been shared in
compressed form.

Screenshots and Image Export
Max can export patches in PNG and PDF format, although PDF export is currently available only on
macOS. To export a patch as an image, select Export Image... from the File menu. In the dialog box
that appears, you'll be able to choose between PNG and PDF export.

774

User Guide / Sharing / Sharing Patchers

With the save dialog open, select the PDF format to export a PDF.

PDF image export saves Max patches in a vector format, with means the image can render at any
scale without losing resolution.

PDF image export will render without loss of resolution, even at extreme zoom levels.

775

User Guide / Sharing / Sharing Patchers

Screen Recording
You can lock the aspect ratio of your patcher window by selecting Aspect Ratio from the Window
menu. This can be useful when you want to record your patch for sharing on a platform that expects
a certain aspect ratio.

You can lock the aspect ratio of your patcher window to one of several common options.

Projects
For sharing large patchers with lots of dependencies, you might want to use a Max Project. For each
patcher in a project. Max keeps track of the resources (audio samples, text documents, video files,
etc.) that the patcher depends on. You can use the consolidate option to bring those resources into
the project folder. You can then use the Archive command to create a .maxzip project archive,
which can be opened by anyone with Max.

776

User Guide / Sharing / Sharing Patchers

A Max project window, showing the implicit dependencies of a patcher that loads audio samples.

Tools and Abstractions
You may find yourself building a library of Max tools, perhaps in the form of abstractions. You might
for example compile a library of audio effects or JavaScript utilities. In order to share these, you can
simply share a folder of the .maxpat files and other resources. For anyone who wants to use these
resources, than can install them anywhere on their computer, provided the installation path is in
Max's search path.

Packages
Over time, your library of tools, abstractions, and other resources may reach the point where you
want to share it with a large number of users. You might want to use the library as part of a class or
workshop, or you might want to distribute it widely to the whole Max community. A Max package
provides a wrapper for libraries like this, making it easier to organize, present, distribute, and update
them. See the user guide page on Max Packages and the Package Manager for more information.

777

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

Projects
Creating Projects

655

Project Window
Project Inspector

656
657

Editing Files in a Project

658

Project Search Paths

659

Open Actions

660

Max for Live Device Projects

660

Projects collect and organize dependencies associated with a patcher or set of patches. These
dependencies can include patches, media files, code, and third-party externals.

Projects also extend the main Max search path. All files in a project can locate other files in the
same project.

Project-specific elements are loaded before any other files on the Max search path.
Project-specific assets don't have to be added to the main Max search path, isolating them
from other patches and Projects.
You can switch between global and Project-local assets.
Using projects lets you reduce the number of folders in Max's global search, which can
improve patcher loading and editing speed.

Creating Projects
You can start with a new empty project, or create a project from an existing patcher.

To create a new empty project, choose New Project from the File menu. This action creates a
Max Project at the location specified. By default, this is ~/Documents/Max/Projects (Mac)
or (User Folder)\My Documents\Max\Projects (Win). Projects can be saved anywhere,
but it is recommended to use the default location.

778

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

To create a project from your existing open patcher, choose Save as Project from the File
menu. This will close and re-open your patcher as a project.

Once the project is created, you don't need to save it: projects are saved automatically
as you edit them.

Project Window

1. Category header: Files in your project are automatically assigned to a category, like
"Patchers", "Media", "Code", or "Data". Categories are only shown if there are matching files
in the project.
2. Patcher opened with project: A project may contain one or more "top-level patchers". These
are displayed in bold in the Project window, and are automatically opened when the project
is loaded.
3. Dependencies: Files local to a project are shown in regular, non-italic text. Dependencies of
project files are shown in a darker color, and if those files are only found on the global Max

779

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

search path, they are shown in italics. Dependencies cannot be removed from a project from
the Project pindow.
4. Add files to Project: To add files to a project, they can be created from scratch, patchers can
be created from templates, and existing files can be added to projects. Files can be removed
by right-clicking on the file name in the Project window and selecting "Remove from
Project." Alternatively, you can highlight the name and use the backspace or delete key on
your keyboard.
5. Details view: When toggled on and a file from the list is selected, details about the file are
shown, including the name, kind and absolute path of the file. If the file is a dependency
(whether explicit or implicit), a link is shown to highlight the patchers in the file list which
use it. Also shown is whether the file is opened with the project or not.
6. Hierarchical and flat view modes: Hierarchical view lists all dependencies underneath the
file which depends on them. Flat view sorts all files, whether dependencies or not, into a flat
list.
7. Manage project: From the Manage Project menu, you can
consolidate and deconsolidate. Consolidation copies all dependencies to the local
project folder. De-consolidation removes any files which can be found on the global
Max search path from your local project directory.
archive. Similar to consolidation, archiving creates a copy of all files needed by the
project. Unlike consolidation, archiving creates a new ".maxzip" archive file that can
be saved and distributed as a single file.
build collectives and applications.
export as a Max for Live device.
8. Project settings: Open the Project Inspector window, the Project Seach Path window, or the
Open Actions text window.
9. Reload Project: Refreshes the Project window.
10. Show Project folder: Opens the project's location on disk.

Project Inspector
The Project Inspector allows you to set preferences for the project's behavior.

780

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

Always Localize Project Items: When enabled, files added to a project will always be copied
to the project's folder before being included in the project. (default = off)
Hide Project Window After Opening: When enabled (and only if the project contains
patchers which are marked "Open on Project Load"), the project window will not be visible
after the Project opens. You can open the Project window later by click on the Show
Containing Project button in the patcher's toolbar. (default = off)
Keep Project Folder Organized: When enabled, files in the project's folder are automatically
sorted into appropriate subfolders based on the file's category. (default = on)
Show Patcher Dependencies: When enabled, implicit dependencies are displayed in the
Project window. (default = on)
Development Path Type: When enabled, allows you to specify the path type for the folder
specified in the Development Path setting. Options are disabled, relative, and absolute.
Development Path: Allows you to choose a project-specific folder for development of Max
for Live projects. When set, all device files for the project will be saved to and referenced
from this location. When disabled, the project uses the global folder
~/Documents/Max 8/Max for Live Devices (Mac) or
(User Folder)\My Documents\Max 8\Max for Live Devices (Win).

Editing Files in a Project
To edit a patcher or text file from a project, double-click on the file's name in the project window.
Alternatively, right-click on the file's name in the project window and choose Open from the
contextual menu.

When editing a patcher from a project, a new icon will appear in the bottom toolbar. You can use
this icon to return to the project window from the patcher.

781

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

If you edit a patcher by opening the patcher file directly, rather than opening the parent
project first, Max won't be able to use the project context to resolve any search path
dependencies. Some dependencies may be found in the wrong location (globally rather
than project-locally), and some may not be found at all. For this reason, if you're
working with a project, be sure to open the project before editing any child patchers.

Project Search Paths
Within a project, patchers and other kinds of files may be marked either global or local. Files
marked global tell Max to use the file found on the global search path, if available. Files marked
local tell Max to use the file found on the Project's search path first, if available. You also have the
ability to publish a file to the global search path or to localize a file to your project's search path.

The project-local search path consists of:

1. Project-local folders: Projects maintain a folder on your hard drive. The contents of this
folder (and its subfolders) are preferentially searched when Max is looking for files
requested by project members. New files added to a project are created inside this folder by
default, and you can manually add files to it, too.
2. Singleton folders: Projects can reference files which are neither in the Max global search
path, nor in the project folder. When searching for files, the folders containing these
"singletons" are searched (non-recursively), as well.

782

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

3. Project search paths: Projects also maintain a list of additional folders to be searched when
locating project assets. This list works similarly to the list found in Max's File Preferences...
window, but is used only by the project.
Dependencies are always presumed to be local. If no local version can be found, the global version
will be used.

Open Actions
Project Open Actions allow you to specify what Max configuration options are loaded when
apProject opens.

In the Open Actions text edit window, you can write various messages to Max. For example,
messages such as ;dsp takeover 1 or ;max overdrive 1 will enable Scheduler in Audio
Interrupt and Overdrive, respectively. When the project is loaded (or reloaded via the Reload Project
button in the Project toolbar), the Open Actions will be executed.

Max for Live Device Projects
All Max for Live devices are projects. There are a few differences between regular Max projects and
Max for Live device projects:

The default location for Max for Live Device Projects is
~/Documents/Max 8/Max for Live Devices (Mac) or
(User Folder)\My Documents\Max 8\Max for Live Devices (Win)

Unfreezing a device will unpack the device's assets to the project's folder, rather than to the
"Unfrozen Max Device Files" folder on the Desktop.
Conflicts are now auto-resolved in favor of the Device version (although you can override
this in the Resolve Conflicts window if you need to).
The Archive... item in the Manage Project toolbar menu creates a datestamped ".zip" archive
of a frozen copy of the current device.
Freezing a device will include all files listed in the Project window (both explicit and implicit
items).

783

User Guide / Sharing / Projects

Freezing a device which utilizes 3rd party externals will automatically collect and freeze the
externals for other Max platforms if they can be found in Max's (or the project's) search path. For
instance, freezing a device which uses myextern.mxe64 on Windows will include myextern.mxo
(macOS) externals if they are available. None of these need to be added explicitly to the project.

784

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

Standalones and Collectives
Building Standalones
Customizing Your Standalone

785
786

Standalone Applications for MacOS

787

Standalone Applications for Windows

788

Search Paths in Standalones

790

The Collective Editor

792

A Standalone lets you turn your Max patcher into an application that can run on its own, without
needing to have the main Max application installed. The resulting file looks and acts like a standard
macOS or Windows application. This can be a handy way to share your work with someone who
doesn't have Max on their machine, or to run your work in a context like an art installation.

Under the hood, a standalone is a bundle containing the Max runtime along with a Collective. A
collective contains all of the dependencies, including media files and Max externals, that a patcher
needs to run. Most of the time, collectives are only used internally by a standalone, and you won't
need to work with them directly. However, you can still open a collective using Max.

If you want to share work with another Max user, consider using a Project. In particular,
a project is the ideal document for collaboration when using Max with a version control
tool like Git.

Building Standalones
The simplest way to build a standalone is to start with a Max project. From the Project window, click
the Manage Project button in the bottom toolbar and select
Build Collective / Application...

785

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

In the dialog box that appears, be sure to select Application from the Filetypes dropdown. From
there, simply press Save. After Max finishes bundling up your project, you'll see the exported
application appear in your file browser.

You can also build a standalone by selecting Build Collective / Application... from the File
menu. If you build a standalone this way, without a Max project open, Max will open the Collective
Editor.

Customizing Your Standalone
To configure options for your standalone, place a standalone object in your toplevel patcher. Open
the inspector for this object to see all of the configuration options available.

Adding a custom application icon
Add a standalone object to your top level patcher. Find the @appicon_mac attribute, and specify
the path to the app icon image to use for macOS. Use the attribute @appicon_win to specify an
app icon for Windows.

Managing standalone size
By default, standalone export includes the whole Max runtime. By setting attributes on the
standalone object, you can include or exclude certain parts of the Max application, which can

786

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

reduce the size of your exported standalone. See the standalone object reference for a full
description, but some options you can configure include:

@gensupport - Enable support for gen~, jit.gen, jit.pix, and jit.gl.pix. Disable to reduce
standalone application size.
@cefsupport - Enable support for the jweb object. Disable to reduce application size.

Standalone Applications for MacOS
Max builds universal binary standalone applications on macOS. The standalone is an application
package , which is also a folder that looks like a file in the Finder. Double-clicking on the file's icon
launches the application. Right-click on the application file and select Show Package Contents from
the contextual menu to look inside the application bundle.

YourApplication.app [ note: the .app is not shown in the Finder ]/
└── Contents [ folder ]/
├── Frameworks [ folder ] – needed for external object support
├── Info.plist [ copied from your Info.plist if included in a
collective build script ]
├── MacOS [ folder ]/
│
└── YourApplication [ actually the Max Runtime executable ]
└── Resources [ folder ]/
├── [ custom icon file goes here ]
└── C74 [ folder containing all supporting files]

Manually including Max resources (macOS)
If you disabled the @copysupport attribute on your toplevel standalone object, Max will not copy
its Resources folder into the standalone application. If you need support for certain features, you
can try to manually copy Max resources into your application bundle.

Including Jitter components in your Mac standalone application
Although they are included by default, if you are not including the C74 Resources, be sure to add
any shader, material, model, passes, or volume-dataset files that your application uses, copying to

787

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

<package>/Contents/Resources/C74/media/jitter/* . Many of the included image-processing

shaders rely on one of the "passthru" vertex shader programs that reside in the shared folder inside
the jitter-shaders folder.

Including Java components in your Macintosh standalone application
Although they are included by default, if you are not including the C74 Resources, copy any
necessary Java class files to <package>/Contents/Resources/C74/java-classes/classes .

Distributing your Mac standalone application
In most cases, Max standalone apps will be distributed outside of the Mac App Store. In order for
the application to open properly, the standalone can be signed (if one pays the $99/year developer
membership) or users of the standalone can informed that the Security and Privacy settings in
System Preferences must be set to 'Allow apps downloaded from Anywhere'. To read more about
signing your application, visit the Apple Developer Site.

For distribution on macOS versions starting with Big Sur (macOS 11), the developer will need to
code sign their standalone application with the appropriate Entitlements in order to avoid the user
being asked for microphone, camera, and disk access every time the app is launched. Learn more in
this article.

Standalone Applications for Windows
When you create a standalone application on Windows, you’re actually creating a folder containing
the Max Runtime executable plus a .mxf collective file containing your patches and files. In addition,
the standalone folder contains a support folder with files necessary to run your application.

788

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

YourApplication [ folder ]
├── YourApplication.exe [modified MaxRT.exe – launch this to launch your
app ]
└── YourApplication.mxf [ collective containing your patches ]
└── support [ folder ]
├── ad [ folder containing MSP audio driver objects ]
├── mididrivers [ folder containing Max midi driver objects ]
├── MaxAPI.dll [ Max API for external objects ]
├── MaxAudio.dll [ MSP library ]
└── interfaces [ folder containing menu specifications, icons,
etc. ]

Runtime library dependency
Max depends on the Microsoft C Runtime Library. To use a standalone on a computer that has not
run the Max installer you must first run the Microsoft Visual C++ 2013 Redistributable Package. This
can be downloaded from Microsoft. An alternative is to simply download and install Max. The
Microsoft redistributable files can be found at this URL:

https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=40784

Manually including Max resources (Windows)
If you disabled the @copysupport attribute on your toplevel standalone object, Max will not copy
its Resources folder into the standalone application. If you need support for certain features, you
can try to manually copy Max resources into your application bundle.

Including Jitter components in your Windows standalone application
Copy the file /Program Files/Cycling '74/Max 9/support/jitlib.dll to
{standalone folder}/support/jitlib.dll

Including Jitter shader components in your Windows standalone application
Copy the file /Program Files/Common Files/Max 9/Cycling '74/jitter-shaders to
{standalone folder}/support/jitter-shaders . Be sure to include any shader files that

789

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

the included shaders depend on; many of the included image-processing shaders rely on
one of the "passthru" vertex shader programs that reside in the
/Program Files/Common Files/Max 9/Cycling '74/jitter-shaders/shared/ folder .

Copy the file /Program Files/Cycling '74/Max 9/support/cg.dll to
{standalone folder}/support/cg.dll

Copy the file /Program Files/Cycling '74/Max 9/support/cgGL.dll to
{standalone folder}/support/cgGL.dll

Including Java components in your Windows standalone application
Copy the file /Program Files/Common Files/Max 9/Cycling '74/java/lib/max.jar to
{standalone folder}/support/java/lib/max.jar .

Copy any other necessary jar files (e.g. jitter.jar ) to
{standalone folder}/support/java/lib/max.jar

Copy / Program Files/Common Files/Max 9/Cycling '74/java/classes/*. class to
{standalone folder}/support/java/classes/*.class (all your necessary class files).

Search Paths in Standalones
A standalone application you create with Max searches for files in a slightly different order than that
used in the Max search path when you’re editing patches. If you want to include non-standard Max
objects or other types of files, you’ll need to understand how search paths and File Preferences
work in standalone applications.

In a standalone application, here is the order in which folders in the standalone package (Macintosh)
or folder (Windows) will be searched:

1. The collective file (and any other open collective files)
2. The support folder
You can add additional locations to this list by checking the Utilize Search Path option in the
standalone object's Inspector.

790

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

On Macintosh systems, checking the Utilize Search Path option, does the following for the search
path of a standalone:

Adds all of the folders inside of the folder containing the standalone application (i.e., the
Contents folder and all of its subfolders).
Adds the Cycling '74 folder. A Cycling '74 folder at the same location as the application is
used if it exists. If it does not, the location /Library/Application Support/Cycling ’74 is used
if it exists.
On Windows systems, checking the Utilize Search Path option, does the following for the search
path of a standalone:

Adds all of the folders inside of the application folder (i.e. the folder containing
YourApplication.exe).
Adds the Cycling '74 folder. A Cycling '74 folder at the same location as the application is
used if it exists. If it does not, the location c:\Program Files\Common Files\Cycling '74\ is
used if it exists.
You can use the Utilize Search Path option to aid in testing your standalone application.

If some of the supporting files used by Max objects in your patcher will not be included in the
collective itself, check the Search for Missing Files option. (It is checked by default.) Unchecking this
option can be useful for ensuring that you have included all necessary files in the collective that you
are making into a standalone application. If you create your application with this option turned off,
your application will not look outside the collective for any files it cannot find, such as missing
sequences or coll files that your application attempts to load. So, you can make your application
with Search for Missing Files unchecked, and then run it to see if it works properly. If your
application is unable to find a file that it needs, you will get an error message to that effect, and you
will know that you have to rebuild your standalone application. In some cases, however, you may
want your application to look for a file outside of the collective. For example, you may want it to
look for a MIDI file that can be supplied by the user of your application. In that case, you will
naturally want the Search for Missing Files option to be on. Please also note that this feature
restricts itself to looking in folders nested only three levels deep.

When your application searches for files outside the collective, you can control where it looks with
the Utilize Search Path in Preferences File option. If this option is on (which it is by default), your
application will use the search path settings stored in the Max Preferences file instead of using the

791

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

default search path. You can instruct your application to use its own Preferences file instead of the
default Max Preferences by supplying a preferences file name in this field. If the Utilize Search Path
in Preferences File is checked and you type in a name other than the default Max Preferences, your
application will make its own unique preferences file (in ~ /Library/Preferences , where ~ represents
your home directory) the first time it is run. From then on, your application will use that preferences
file to recall the settings for options such as Overdrive or All Windows Active (Windows systems
only).

On Macintosh systems, the Finder uses a four-character ID to distinguish one application from
another. When you create a standalone, a default generic creator ( ???? ) is assigned to the
application automatically. You can use the standalone object Inspector to change this to a unique
ID.

Testing your standalone search path
Open the inspector for your toplevel standalone object. Disable the Utilize Search Path setting, and
build your application. If you see any errors indicating no such object or can’t find files in
the Max Console when you launch the program, you will know which supporting files you have not
properly included.

Checking the current file paths in use
Add a message box containing the message ; max paths to your patcher and then activate the
message box. The current file paths in use will be printed to the Max Console.

The Collective Editor
The Collective Editor window lets you define the steps that Max will take when it bundles together
a collective. You can include patchers, files, and folders, so you can be sure that all your
dependencies will be included in your standalone or collective.

792

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

The Collective Editor window includes a script area, and a number of buttons for configuring your
collective. The script shows each of the steps involved in building the collective. The first entry in
the script open thispatcher is added for you. This tells the collective to include the patcher that
was the topmost window when the collective editor was opened. The open keyword means that
the patcher will be opened when the collective file is opened.

If you're managing a complex system with lots of potential dependencies, it's often
easier to work with a project than to configure your collective manually using the
collective editor. When you build a standalone from a project, Max will automatically
use the implicit and explicit dependencies of the project to define your collective.

Collective dependencies
For your main toplevel patcher, and for any other patchers that you include in your
standalone/collective, Max will try to automatically include any dependencies of that patcher. Any
object with an explicit dependency will be able to share that dependency with the standalone
builder.

793

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

This v8 object has an explicit dependency, so that dependency will be included automatically in any standalone or
collective.

If you load a file dynamically, or include the name of a dependency in a message box, that
dependency might not be registered automatically. In this case, you would need to add the
dependency manually when defining your collective.

This buffer object does not have an explicit depednency. The audio file 'my-sample.aif' would need to be added
manually to any exported standalone or collective.

Adding toplevel patchers
A Toplevel patcher window opens when the collective opens. You can have more than one toplevel
patcher (you need at least one, however). To add a toplevel patcher, plick the Toplevel Patcher...
button in the Collective Editor window and choose a patcher file from the open file dialog that
appears.

Once you select the file, a new line using the open keyword is added to the script. If you were to
open this standalone or collective, both of the files listed with the open keyword would initially be
visible.

794

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

Adding files to a standalone/collective
Click the Include File... button in the Collective Editor window and select the file you want to
add from the open file dialog.
The full path of the file chosen will be added to the build script, preceded by the include
keyword.
Adding folders to a standalone/collective
If you have an entire folder of data files you want to include, you can include all the files at once.

Click the Include Folder... button in the Collective Editor window and select the folder you
want to add from the open file dialog.
The full path of the folder chosen will be added to the build script, preceded by the
include keyword.

Including a folder will only include files in the folder itself. Folders inside the folder
(subfolders) will not be included.

Saving and reloading the build script
After you've configured your standalone/collective by adding files and folders, you can save your
configuration to a build script. This lets you load that script later if you want to make changes to
your configuration.

Click the Save Script... button in the Collective Editor window and type in a name for your
script in the file dialog box. A copy of the current build instructions will be written to a text
file.
If you have previously saved a build script for your collective, you can open the file and use it for
quick editing and/or rebuilding.

795

User Guide / Sharing / Standalones and Collectives

Click the Open Script... button in the Collective Editor window and choose the build script
you have created for your standalone/collective.
The Collective Editor window will display the contents of the file you have loaded. At this
point, you can click the Build button to build your collective, or modify the script if
necessary.

Since a collective script uses absolute path names to refer to files, the script is not
necessarily transferrable from one machine to another.

796

User Guide / Timing

Timing

797

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

Scheduler and Priority
High Priority and Low Priority

799

Configuring the Scheduler

799

Infinite Loops and Stack Overflow

802

Starting and Stopping the Scheduler

803

Changing Priority

804

Event Backlog and Data Rate Reduction

805

Whenever something happens in a Max patcher, it starts with an Event.

Events can be generated from different sources—for example, a MIDI keyboard, the metro object, a
mouse click, a computer keyboard, etc. After an event is generated, Max either passes the event to
the high-priority scheduler, or puts it onto the low-priority queue. Periodically, Max services the
queue, during which it removes an event from the queue and handles it.

Handling an event usually means sending a message to an object, which might send messages to
another object, until finally the event has been completely handled. The way in which these
messages traverse the patcher network is depth first, meaning that a path in the network is always
followed to its terminal node before messages will be sent down adjacent paths.

Loose visual representation of how Max works. Clicking a button generates a 'click' event, which Max puts onto a
queue. When it services the queue, it handles the event by sending a message to the target object and propagating
messages through the patcher graph.

798

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

High Priority and Low Priority
Some events have timing information associated with them, like the ones that come from a MIDI
keyboard or a metro object. We call these events high priority events, since they happen at a
specific time, and Max wants to prioritize handling them at that time. These are also called
scheduler events, since they are handled by Max's scheduler. All other events are low priority
events. Max tries to process these as fast as possible, but not at any specific time. These are also
called queue events, since Max doesn't decide when to process them based on timing information,
but simply by processing them in first-in-first-out order.

Configuring the Scheduler
The two most important settings for the scheduler are Overdrive and Scheduler in Audio Interrupt.
Overdrive is so important that you can toggle it directly by selecting Overdrive from the Options
menu. You can also enable overdrive from the Max Preferences Window, which is also the place to
enable Scheduler in Audio Interrupt.

For all other scheduler settings, including low-level, explicit control over all the details of how the
scheduler operates, you can tweak the scheduler preferences.

Overdrive and parallel execution
With Overdrive enabled, Max uses two separate threads to process high priority and low priority
events. This means that high priority events can be handled before a low priority event has finished
executing, resulting in better timing accuracy for high priority events. Using multiple threads also
has the advantage that on multi-processor machines, one processor could be executing low priority
events, while a second processor could be executing high priority events.

Normally, Max processes both kinds of events in the same thread, neither one interrupting the
other. A high priority event would have to wait for a low priority event to be handled completely
before the high priority event itself may be executed. This waiting results in less accurate timing for
high priority events, and in some instances a long stall when waiting for very long low priority
events, like loading an audio file into a buffer~ object.

799

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

By default, overdrive is disabled. This is because it adds a small amount of complexity to the way
patches work, since high priority and low priority messages will pass through the patcher network
simultaneously. Usually you can ignore this, but sometimes it might be important to remember that
with overdrive on, the state of a patcher could change in the middle of an event being processed.

In addition, the debugging features of Max only work if overdrive is disabled.

Scheduler in Audio Interrupt
When Scheduler in Audio Interrupt (SIAI) is turned on, the high-priority scheduler runs inside the
audio thread. The advancement of scheduler time is tightly coupled with the advancement of DSP
time, and the scheduler is serviced once per signal vector. This can be desirable in a variety of
contexts, however it is important to note a few things.

First, if using SIAI, you will want to watch out for expensive calculations in the scheduler, or else it
is possible that the audio thread will not keep up with its real-time demands and hence drop
vectors. This will cause large clicks and glitches in the audio output. To minimize this problem, you
may want to turn down poll throttle to limit the number of events that are serviced per scheduler
servicing, increase the I/O vector size to build in more buffer time for varying performance per
signal vector, and/or revise your patches so that you are guaranteed no such expensive calculations
in the scheduler.

Second, with SIAI, the scheduler will be extremely accurate with respect to the MSP audio signal,
however, due to the way audio signal vectors are calculated, the scheduler might be less accurate
with respect to actual time. For example, if the audio calculation is not very expensive, there may be
clumping towards the beginning of one I/O vector worth of samples. If timing with respect to both
DSP time and actual time is a primary concern, a decreased I/O vector size can help improve things,
but as mentioned above, might lead to more glitches if your scheduler calculations are expensive.
Another trick to synchronize with actual time is to use an object like the date object to match
events with the system time as reported by the OS.

Third, if using SIAI, the scheduler and audio processing share the same thread, and therefore may
not be as good at exploiting multi-processor resources.

800

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

Best practices
When Overdrive is enabled, Max gives priority to timing and MIDI processing over screen drawing
and user interface tasks such as responding to mouse clicks. If you are primarily going to be using
Max for MIDI or audio processing, Overdrive should be enabled. If you are primarily going to be
using Jitter, Overdrive should be disabled.

As for SIAI, remember that with SIAI enabled, the scheduler uses the audio sample counter, rather
than "real-world time", to schedule events. If your patcher is generating events that affect your
audio processing, and the sync between audio and events is important, you should enable SIAI. If
it's more important that your scheduler syncs with the outside world, including synchronization with
external hardware, then disable SIAI.

If you need a balance of both, use SIAI with as small an I/O vector size as you can afford to without
dropouts. Just be aware that this is more demanding on your computer, and you might have to
change your settings if you hear audio dropouts.

Advanced settings
Sor all other scheduler configuration, see the scheduler section in Max's preferences. This section
discusses these settings in detail.

Event Interval sets the interval, in milliseconds, at which low-priority (main thread) queue
events are throttled. Historically, Max would poll for events at the event interval. Recent
versions of Max avoid polling, for increased efficiency, but incoming events are throttled at
the event interval. The default value of is 2 ms.
Poll Throttle sets the number of high-priority events processed per by the scheduler at one
time. High-priority events include MIDI as well as events generated by metro and other
timing objects. A lower setting (e.g., 1) means less event clumping, while a higher value (e.g.,
100) will result in less of an event backlog. The default value is 20 events.
Queue Throttle sets the number of events processed per servicing of the low priority event
queue (Low priority events include user interface events, graphics operations, reading files
from disk, and other expensive operations that would otherwise cause timing problems for
the scheduler). A lower setting (e.g. 1) means less event clumping, while a higher value (e.g.
100) will result in less of an event backlog. The default value is 10 events.

801

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

Redraw Queue Throttle sets the maximum number of patcher UI update events to process at
a time. Lower values can lead to more processing power being made available to other lowpriority Max processes, and higher values make user interfaces more responsive (especially
for patches in which large numbers of bpatcher objects are being used). The default value is
1000 events.
Refresh Rate sets the minimum time, in milliseconds, between updating of the interface. A
lower setting (e.g., 5) means that Max will devote more time to redrawing the screen and
less to responding to user input, while a higher value (e.g., 60) will mean that the interface is
faster and more responsive. The default value is 33.3 ms.
Scheduler slop is the amount of time, in milliseconds, the scheduler is permitted to fall
behind actual time before correcting the scheduler time to actual time. The scheduler will
fall behind actual time if there are more high priority events than the computer can process.
Typically some amount of slop is desired so that high priority events will maintain long term
temporal accuracy despite small temporal deviations. A lower setting (e.g., 1) results in
greater short term accuracy, while a higher value (e.g., 100) will mean that the scheduler is
more accurate in the long term. The default value is 25 milliseconds.

Infinite Loops and Stack Overflow
If you try to connect DSP objects in a loop, Max will post an error message to the console, and
audio processing will be disabled.

However, Max has no problem letting you make regular message connections that form a loop. In
fact, this can be a useful way to process data recursively, or to implement an iterative algorithm.

802

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

However, if sending a message from one object to the next causes messages to be sent forever in
an infinite loop, this will cause a stack overflow.

The stack overflow results since a network containing feedback has infinite depth, and the
computer runs out of memory attempting to handle the event. When Max encounters a stack
overflow, it will disable all outputs until you clear the message at the top of the patcher window.
This will give you a chance to look at the patcher and figure out where the stack overflow occured.

You can break an infinite loop into chunks by scheduling a new event, either using a
high-priority timing object like pipe or delay, or using the low-priority deferlow object.

Starting and Stopping the Scheduler
Press ⌘. (macOS) or CTRL. (Windows) to stop the scheduler. You can also select Stop Scheduler
from the Edit menu. With the scheduler stopped, timing objects like metro, pipe, and delay will no
longer function. MIDI input and output objects like midiin and midiout will stop working too.

To start the scheduler again, press ⌘r (macOS) or CTRLr (Windows), or select Resume Scheduler
from the Edit menu.

803

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

Stopping the scheduler is useful if you want to pause a patcher that's doing a lot of automated
execution. You might have a bunch of metro objects, each on a one millisecond delay, each causing
a bunch of processing to happen. By stopping the scheduler, you can temporarily disable
everything, giving yourself a chance to make edits to your patcher.

Changing Priority
Certain objects will always execute messages at low priority, even when they receive a message
during a high-priority event. For example, if a MIDI messages causes a buffer~ to load a new audio
file, buffer~ will still load that file at low priority. Messages that cause drawing, read or write to a
file, or launch a dialog box are typical examples of things which are not desirable at high priority.

The notein object generates messages in response to MIDI events, which execute at high priority. However, buffer~
loads files at low priority, so the notification that buffer~ has finished loading a file will come out at low priority.

You can use the defer and deferlow objects to do this same kind of deferral explicitly, generating a
new event that will be handled from the low-priority queue. The defer object will put the new event
at the front of the low-priority queue, while the deferlow object will put it at the back. This is an
important difference, since it means that defer can reverse the order of a message sequence, while
deferlow will preserve order.

804

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

The defer object will not defer event execution if executed from the low-priority queue,
while the deferlow object will always put a new event at the back of the low-priority
queue, even when handling a low-priority event. If it receives a message from a lowpriority event, the defer object will simply pass that messages through, without putting
a new event on the queue.

To move an event from the low-priority queue to the high-priority scheduler, use the delay or pipe
objects to schedule a new, high-priority event. You might want to do this in order to force certain
computations to happen at high priority, or to schedule an event for a specific time.

Event Backlog and Data Rate Reduction
With very rapid data streams, such as a high frequency metro, or the output of a snapshot~ object
with a rapid interval like 1 millisecond, it is easy to generate more events than can be processed in
real time. The high priority scheduler or low priority queue can fill up will events faster than Max
can process them. Max will struggle to process new events and, eventually, the whole application
will crash.

One common cause of event backlog is connecting an object that generates high-priority events to
one that always execute in low priority. This could occur when connecting a snapshot~ object to a
v8 object. Since v8 always executes at low priority, this will push an event onto the low priority
queue every time that snapshot~ generates an event.

If the v8 object runs an expensive computation when it receives a float, this could cause backlog on the lowpriority queue.

The speedlim, qlim, and onebang objects are useful at performing data rate reduction on these
rapid streams to keep up with real time. In the above case, you could use speedlim to limit the rate

805

User Guide / Timing / Scheduler and Priority

at which messages get sent from snapshot~ to v8.

The speedlim object limits the rate at which messages pass from snapshot~ to v8.

There's nothing inherent wrong with connecting an object like snapshot~ to an object
like v8. Rather, you should simply be aware of what's going on behind the scenes, so
you know how to modify your patcher if it isn't behaving the way you want.

806

User Guide / Timing / Time Value Syntax

Time Value Syntax
Fixed Time Values

807

Tempo-relative Time Values

808

Note Values in Ticks

809

Positions vs Intervals

810

Most Max objects that deal with timed events, like metro, phasor~, and pipe, can represent time in
multiple ways. In general these fall into two categories: Fixed time values and Tempo-relative time
values. Fixed values express time in milliseconds or some other absolute units. Tempo-relative
values depend on the current tempo and time signature, as set by a transport object (or the Global
Transport).

Fixed Time Values

Some objects using Fixed time values

Unit

Format

Example

Notes

milliseconds

ms suffix

100 ms

The default for objects like metro

hours/minutes/seconds

: between

01:03:45.250

1 hour, 3 minutes, 45 seconds, and

each

250 milliseconds. The millisecond

number

value after the decimal is optional.

807

User Guide / Timing / Time Value Syntax

hours/minutes/seconds

list of 3 or 4

An equivalent option for representing

numbers,

1 3 45
250

followed by

hh:mm:ss

hours/minutes/seconds/milliseconds

The actual duration will depend on the

suffix

1000
samples

hz suffix

5 hz

The inverse of milliseconds, so 2 hz is

time in terms of

hh:mm:ss

samples

samples

frequency

sample rate

equivalent to 500 ms .

Tempo-relative Time Values

Some objects using Tempo-relative time values

All Tempo-relative Time Values can be expressed in terms of ticks, where one tick is 1/4801/480 of a
quarter note (equivalently, there are 480 ticks in one quarter note).

Unit

Format

Example

Notes

ticks

ticks

100
ticks

In places where only tempo-relative time values are allowed,

suffix

such as the @quantize attribute of the metro object, values in
ticks can be specified as a single number. In places where both
fixed and tempo-relative units are accepted, such as the
@interval attribute of a metro object, a value in ticks must be

followed by ticks to be interpreted as ticks instead of
milliseconds.

808

User Guide / Timing / Time Value Syntax

note values

see "Note

4nt

Values"

Symbols that abbreviate musical note time values
—see the table below for recognized values.

table
bars/beats/units

.

2.4.240

between
each

2 bars, 4 beats, 240 ticks. When you need to use
a single value, bars/beats/units can be separated
by periods.

number
bars/beats/units

three
numbers

2 4 240

When you can pass a list of values,
bars/beats/units can be specified by separate
numbers like this. When an object will accept
Fixed or Tempo-relative time values, you can add
bbu to make sure the list is understood as
bars/beats/units and not hours/minutes/seconds.

Note Values in Ticks
Note

Ticks

Interpretation

1nd

2880 ticks

Dotted whole note

1n

1920 ticks

Whole note

1nt

1280 ticks

Whole note triplet

2nd

1440 ticks

Dotted half note

2n

960 ticks

Half note

2nt

640 ticks

Half note triplet

4nd

720 ticks

Dotted quarter note

4n

480 ticks

Quarter note

4nt

320 ticks

Quarter note triplet

8nd

360 ticks

Dotted eighth note

8n

240 ticks

Eighth note

8nt

160 ticks

Eighth note triplet

809

User Guide / Timing / Time Value Syntax

16nd

180 ticks

Dotted sixteenth note

16n

120 ticks

Sixteenth note

16nt

80 ticks

Sixteenth note triplet

32nd

90 ticks

Dotted thirty-second note

32n

60 ticks

thirty-second note

32nt

40 ticks

thirty-second-note triplet

64nd

45 ticks

Dotted sixty-fourth note

64n

30 ticks

Sixty-fourth note

128n

15 ticks

One-hundred-twenty-eighth note

Positions vs Intervals
Some objects will interpret a Tempo-relative value in bars/beats/units as a position, while others will
interpret the same value as an interval. For example, the timepoint object fires an event at a point in
time, and would interpret the bars/beats/units value 1 1 0 bbu as a point in time on the first beat
of the first measure—in other words at time zero. Attributes like the @quantize attribute of metro
on the other hand wil interpret the same value 1 1 0 bbu as an interval of one bar and one beat,
or 5 beats in 4/44/4 time (interval, quantization, and delay attributes of objects are generally time
intervals).

The translate object has a @mode attribute that can convert time units as either intervals or
positions.

810

User Guide / Timing / Transport

Transport
Accessing the Global Transport

811

Controlling the Transport

811

Named Transports

812

Max for Live
Transport Resolution

813
814

Most DAWs, especially those that organize audio and MIDI into tracks, have some notion of a
playhead. When you tell the program to "play", the playhead represents the point in the current
song or session at which play will resume. There are usually controls to play, stop, and loop
playback, as well as some way to set the tempo and time signature. Max doesn't organize audio and
MIDI into tracks and clips, but it does have a transport that you can use to organize events in time.

Accessing the Global Transport
Open the Global Transport by choosing Global Transport from the Extras menu. This will bring up the
Global Transport window, which is an interface to Max's shared global transport. All patches in Max
can access this transport, and objects that work with the transport can react when the transport
starts, stops, changes position, or changes tempo.

The global transport window

Controlling the Transport

811

User Guide / Timing / Transport

From the Global Transport window, you can start and stop the transport by clicking the Activate
button at the top of the window. It's also possible to start the global transport from the toolbar of
any Max patcher. The play button on the right of the bottom toolbar can start and stop the global
transport.

Transport controls in the patcher toolbar

To change the tempo of the global transport from the patcher toolbar, option- or alt-drag up or
down on the play button control. The current tempo will be displayed in a caption above the
control.

The transport object can also act as an interface to the global transport. This object lets you control
all aspects of the transport, including play/pause state, tempo, and time signature, as well as
retrieving the current play position.

Named Transports
In addition to the global transport, it's also possible to create named transports using the @name
attribute of a transport object. All transport objects with the same name essentially act as an

812

User Guide / Timing / Transport

interface to the same, shared transport, and this includes transport objects in different Max
patches.

The Global Transport has the reserverd name internal . If you send a transport object
the message name internal , that object will act as an interface to the global
transport.

By default, objects like metro and timepoint refer to the Global Transport. To refer to a particular,
named transport, use the @transport attribute of these objects.

Two {transport} objects with the same name are an interface to one shared transport. Starting one will start the
other, and visa versa.

Max for Live
In a Max for Live device, the transport object will be bound to Live's transport. You can send the
object a bang to get the current state of Live's transport, but you can't control Live's tranport this
way. Instead, use the Max for Live API to interface with the Live application
link to the relevant doc here . Other named transports—transports not bound to the Live

transport—are not supported.

813

User Guide / Timing / Transport

Transport Resolution
The resolution of the transport is always 480 PPQ (reference to the MIDI standard). When it comes
to scheduling events, the transport uses the same Scheduler as all other events in Max, and so
ultimately the resolution of the Max scheduler determines the resolution of transport events.

814

User Guide / Max for Live

Max for Live

815

User Guide / Max for Live / Max for Live Overview

Max for Live
Example Devices
Learning Resources

816
817

Jitter and Max for Live

817

Max for Live Documentation

818

Max for Live allows you to harness the power and flexibility of Max inside Ableton Live. Using Max
for Live, you can build your own devices and tools that enable you to completely control and shape
how you work and create with Live. You can make:

Audio Effects
MIDI Effects
Instruments
MIDI Transformations and Generators
You'll be able to connect custom hardware controllers, design sequencers, process audio in novel
and exciting ways, and much more.

Example Devices
Live Suite users have access to a wealth of packs on the packs store. From here you might get an
idea of what Max for Live lets you build, including sequencers, custom note transformations, tools
for controlling modular synthesisers, bespoke instruments and more.

There are also some parts of Ableton Live's software that are built using Max and it is a fully
capable tool for making high-quality, professional devices. For example, Convolution Reverb,
Granulator II and Granulator III are all devices made with a combination of Max and sometimes
RNBO.

Lastly, one of the major strengths of Max and Max for Live is its community and the spirit of sharing
that comes with it. There are lots of great devices that can help you feel inspired by other people,

816

User Guide / Max for Live / Max for Live Overview

often found at https://maxforlive.com.

Learning Resources
Max for Live extends how you can use Ableton Live through a combination of objects, abstractions
and APIs. All of these different tools and capabilities are embedded in "devices". A device is file
ending in the .amxd extension which can be loaded and used in Ableton Live, much like the
existing library of devices that are shipped with Live. A Max for Live device can contain patchers,
abstractions, media and anything that can be added to a Max collective. To begin putting all these
building blocks together, we recommend the Building Max Devices pack. This pack guides you
through building your own devices, while also offering over 90 devices that you can use as the basis
of your own experimentation. You might also want to investigate both the MSP and Max tutorials to
get a better handle on the mechanics of patching just in Max.

Another option to supplement this is to take a look at the Max sidebar and the Max for Live
clippings and snippets. These include lots of helpful shortcuts for putting together your own work.

Jitter and Max for Live
You may find these tips useful if you want to create a Max for Live device using Jitter.

If you are using Vizzie in a Max for Live device, you will need to use a PROJECTR module or
a vs.projectr Vizzie abstraction in your device.
If you are using jit.world in a Max for Live device, you will need an implicitly named context
or a --- (triple-dash) named context.
When you export a Max for Live project which includes a named context, a new instance of
that context will be created during the export to the .amxd device. If the patch that includes
that named context is open when you export the Project, you will see an error in the
console that ob3d does not allow multiple bindings. The patch you're working on will no
longer work as expected until you close it and then relaunch it after your export.
Jitter operates in Ableton Live’s interface update thread. This has two major effects:
Jitter frame updates will be interrupted by the Live application’s interface redraws.

817

User Guide / Max for Live / Max for Live Overview

The maximum frame rate is dependent on the Ableton application’s audio buffer
size.

Max for Live Documentation
Creating Devices
Creating Devices Overview
Creating Audio Devices
Creating MIDI Effects
Creating MIDI Tools
User Interfaces
Symbols
Timing
Limitations
Live API
Live API Overview
Creating Live API Devices
Parameters
Automation
Parameters
Parameters Window
Pattr
Sharing Devices
Sharing
Freezing

818

User Guide / Max for Live / Max for Live Overview

Unfreezing
Resolving Conflicts

819

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

Live API Overview
Live Object Model

820

Object Path

821

Root objects

821

Canonical Path

821

Canonical Parent
Object ids

822
822

Object Types

823

Children

823

Properties

823

Functions

823

Datatypes

824

Notifications
Max Objects

824
825

LiveAPI

827

Examples

827

Besides building new instruments and effects to be used in Live, Max For Live also allows to access
Live itself, its tracks, clips, devices and hardware control surfaces. This chapter defines some basic
terms used throughout the whole Live API and introduces the Max objects representing the Live
API.

Live Object Model
The accessible parts of Live are represented by a hierarchy of objects called the Live Object Model
(LOM).

The model describes the hierarchy of objects inside Live, as seen from the Max devices. There are
various types of objects in the model, like Track or Clip . For certain objects only a single
instance exists, for other multiple instances are held in lists.

The Live Object Model reference shows how to navigate from a number of root objects down a
path to the particular object of interest, and what to do with it. Not all of Live's parameters are

820

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

accessible via Live's API, the reference should give you an idea of what can and can't be done via
Max for Live.

Object Path
Live objects are accessed using paths according to the Live Object Model. For example, the first clip
in the third track can be accessed by the path live_set tracks 2 clip_slots 0 clip .
Alternatively, it can be accessed via live_set scenes 0 clip_slots 2 clip . Or, if the clip is
shown in the detail view, via live_set view detail_clip .

As you can see, different paths can point to the same Live object. Only one of these paths is the
canonical path (see below).

When communicating with the Live API, no quotes are used in paths. List indexes start with 0.

When navigating through the object model, besides these absolute paths, relative paths can be used.
These determine a subpath beginning at the current position in the object hierarchy.

Root objects
(Absolute) paths to all objects start with one of live_app , live_set , control_surfaces N or
this_device . These are the root objects.

live_app : allows you to access controls of the Live application itself. This can be useful if you

want to toggle the browser view, zoom or scroll features in Live. live_set : allows you to access
various parameters within Live, for example Track Volume, Clip parameters (including launching
Clips), etc. control_surfaces : allows you to access various control surface features (depending
on your controller). this_device : allows you to construct API paths relative to the device you are
in.

Canonical Path

821

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

Different paths can lead to the same object. live_set view selected_track and
live_set tracks 3 are the same object if the fourth track is selected.

Each object has a unique canonical path, live_set tracks 3 in this case. The canonical path is
sent out of live.object in reponse to getpath . In the Live Object Model, the canonical path is
shown by bold connectors.

Canonical Parent
Additionally to what is described in the LOM, all objects have a canonical_parent child which is
used by Live to determine the canonical path of an object. The canonical parents are get-only and
useful for patching, too. For example, goto this_device canonical_parent is the perfect way
to get the own track object.

Object ids
An object id identifies a particular object instance in Live like a track or a clip.

To get an id, a live.path object must be used to navigate to the Live object. When a live.path object
sees this Live object the first time, an id is assigned to it.

The id is only valid inside the device with the live.path and remains unchanged as long the object
exists. If the object is moved in Live, its id usually remains unchanged. There may be exceptions if
the movement is implemented as a delete/create sequence, though. When an object is deleted and
a new object is created at its place, it will get a new id.

An id is never reused in the scope of a Max device. Ids are not stored. Therefore, after loading a
saved device, the live.path object must navigate to the object again.

An object id consists of the word id and a number, separated by a space, like id 3 . id 0 refers
to no object. In Max terms it's a list of the symbol id and an integer.

822

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

Object Types
Each Live object is of a particular object type (or class), like Track or Clip . This object type
determines what kind of object that is and what children, properties and functions it has. The object
types are described in detail in the Live Object Model.

When live.object refers to a Live object, sending it getinfo will send all the Live object's children,
properties and functions to its left outlet.

Children
Live objects have children identified by name. Some names, like master_track for the Song
object type, point to single objects. Others, like scenes , point to a list of objects. The child name
hints at which object type you can expect to find there.

List names are in plural, whereas single child names are in singular. Lists may be empty. Sending
getcount child_name to live.path allows to find out how many children are in the list.

Single children names may point to no object, in which case you get id 0 if you navigate there or
send get child_name to live.object.

Most children can be monitored using live.observer.

Properties
Live objects have properties which describe its actual state. Properties are accessed by sending
get and set messages to live.object. Not all properties can be set, though.

Many properties can be monitored using live.observer.

Functions
823

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

Many Live objects have functions which can be called by sending call and the function name to
live.object, like call create_scene for a Song object. A function call may have parameters (a list
of values). The return value will be sent out from the outlet of live.object.

Datatypes
Properties and function parameters or return values used in the Live Object Model and by the Max
objects to access the Live API have one of the following data types:

Datatype

Description

bool

0 for false and 1 for true

symbol

a string with unicode character setUse double quotes in message boxes to create
symbols with spaces: set name "Smooth Synth" Double quotes in symbols are to
be prefixed by backslashes: set name "Smooth \"Baby\" Synth" Backslashes are
to be included as double backslashes: alpha beta \"gamma\" \\x\\ creates the
symbol alpha beta "gamma" \x\ .

int

a 32 bit signed integer

float

a 32 bit float value

double

a 64 bit float value (maily used for timing values)

beats

song beat time counted in quarter notes, represented as double

time

song time in seconds, represented as doubleTime is given in seconds:
time = beats * 60 / tempo_in_bpm , or sometimes in milliseconds:
time = 1000 * beats * 60 / tempo_in_bpm

list

a space separated list of the types above

Notifications
When Max devices need to know the state of the Live application and its objects, they can actively
poll the state by navigating through the object hierarchy and getting object properties or calling
functions.

824

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

But changes happen in Live while the Max device is passive. To allow the Max device to react on
these changes in Live, notifications are sent from Live to the Max device. Notifications are
spontaneous in the sense that messages are sent to outlets spontaneously, not in response to a
message received at an inlet.

The notifications include object ids sent when the Live object at a certain path changes and values
sent when a property changes.

Note: changes to a Live Set and its contents are not possible from a notification. The
error message in the Max Console is 'Changes cannot betriggered by notifications'. In
many cases putting a deferlow between the notification outlet and the actual change
helps to resolve the issue.

Max Objects
Four Max objects interact in a certain way to allow Max devices to access the Live objects.

Max object

Purpose

live.path

select objects in the Live object hierarchy

live.object

get and set properties and children, call functions

live.observer

monitor properties and children

live.remote~

control Live device parameters in real time

The following patch shows the typical interconnections between the Live API objects. live.path is
sending object ids out of its leftmost outlet connected to the rightmost inlet of live.object,
live.observer and live.remote~. This causes these objects to operate on the object selected by
live.path.

825

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

live.path
live.path objects are used to navigate to the Live objects on which live.object, live.observer and
live.remote~ are supposed to operate. For this purpose, navigation messages like goto live_set
are sent to live.path, which replies by sending an object id to the left outlet.

live.path can also observe the given path, and when the object at this path changes, its id is sent to
the middle outlet. This is particularly useful for paths like live_set view selected_track which
point to the currently selected track.

live.object
live.object is used to operate on a particular Live object which id has been received from live.path.
It allows to get or set properties of the Live object and to call its functions with parameters.

live.observer
live.observer monitors the state of a particular Live object which id has been received from
live.path. After telling live.observer which property to observe it recognizes all changes of the
property and sends the current values to its left outlet.

live.remote~
live.remote~ receives the id of a DeviceParameter object from live.path and then allows to feed this
parameter with new values by sending them into the left inlet, in realtime, without effects on the
undo history or the parameter automation, which is deactivated.

826

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

DeviceParameter objects are children of Live devices, including Max devices, and also of tracks, like
volume and pan.

LiveAPI
The Live API Javascript object is available in code written for the js object. It provides a succinct
means of communicating with the Live API functions from JavaScript, incorporating the
functionality provided by the live.path, live.object and live.observer objects.

Examples
Here are some examples of accessing Live from Max.

Controlling the volume slider of the selected track
Getting the volume of a track
To get the volume of a track in Live, we first need to find the path to the volume parameter of the
track's mixer device.

In the Live Object Model reference, the graph can be navigated starting at the live_set root
node. From the Song object, we use tracks to get the list of Track children. We select the
second track with 1 (note that indexing starts at 0). We then use mixer_device to get its
MixerDevice object, and finally by using volume , we get to the volume DeviceParameter

object.

We can now send this path to a live.path with the following message:
path live_set tracks 1 mixer_device volume . live.path will give us back id n (where n is an

integer), which represents the DeviceParameter object we need. It gives us access to the
properties of the mixer device's volume control, like its range ( min and max ), default value (
default_value ) or current value ( value ).

When we send this id to the right inlet of a live.object, we can get the properties of the
DeviceParameter object with get messages. By sending get value to the live.object, it will send
the current volume value to its left outlet as a number between 0 and 1.

827

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

Initializing a path when the device loads
If we want to make sure the live.object is set to the path we specified as soon as the device is
loaded, we might be tempted to use loadbang to send the path message to live.path. It is
important to know that we need to use live.thisdevice instead, to make sure the Live API is
initialized before interacting with it.

Getting the volume of the selected track
In the previous example we hard-coded getting the volume value of the second track. However, if
we would like to get the value of the selected track, we can use the selected_track child of the
Song View instead.

After finding the selected_track keyword in the Live Object Model reference, we see that it is a
child of Song.View . In the graph we see that the Song.View can be reached from the Song
object type with the view keyword. So we send the following message to live.path :
path live_set view selected_track mixer_device volume . This will send the id of the

currently selected track to the left outlet, which we send to live.object.

Knowing when a different track is selected
In the previous example, we got the id of the selected track once. However, if we select a different
track, this id is no longer up to date. If we want the id from a path containing a dynamic element
like selected_track to stay up to date, we can use the second outlet of live.path.

Hovering the mouse cursor over the outlets over an object will show you what they send out. The
second outlet of live.path reads id: follows path . When instead of the live.path 's left outlet we
connect its second outlet to live.object, the live.object will be kept up to date, even after selecting a
different track.

There is one catch, as mentioned under Notifications. Since the second outlet of live.path sends us
notifications from Live, when we connect it to another Live API object like live.object, we need to
add a deferlow in-between to make sure the next API interaction is not attempted before the first is
finished.

Setting the volume of a track

828

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

In much the same way as getting the current volume of a track like above, we can also change the
value of a volume fader.

We can add a slider with a range between 0 and 1, connected to a message box saying
set value $1 . We can then connect this to the live.object as set up above, and now our slider will

control the volume slider in Live.

Observing the volume of a track
We might want to get an update in our device whenever a Live user changes a volume slider. For
this, we can send the id from the previously set up live.path to a live.observer that has its argument
set to the property value . Now, the up to date volume values will be output from the live.observer
's left outlet.

Finally, we can set this value to the slider we created earlier. We now have a device with a slider
that mimics and changes the volume slider of the selected track in Live.

Triggering a clip with MIDI notes
Navigating to a specific clip and triggering it

829

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

Apart from children and properties, Live objects also have functions. Looking at the Live Object
Model reference, under Clip , in the Functions section, we can find the fire function. To call this
function, we first need to refer a live.object to the clip we want to launch. For this, we need the
clip's id.

Getting an id is done with live.path. Finding out what path to supply is most easily done by looking
at the LOM graph. In the graph, we find the Clip object. To reach it, we start at the Song root
node ( live_set ), go to its list of Track children and pick the first ( track 0 ). Next we go to the
list of ClipSlot children and pick, for example, the fourth ( clip_slots 3 ), and finally we
navigate to the Clip contained by this clip slot ( clip ). So the message we send to live.path will
be path live_set tracks 0 clip_slots 3 clip .

We send the id output from the left outlet of live.path to live.object 's second inlet. There are no
dynamic elements in the path, so we don't need to use live.path 's second outlet. And now that we
are ready to launch the clip, we simply send call fire to the left inlet of the live.object.

Adding control of which clip to fire and checking if it exists
We might want to use two live.numbox es to control the track number and the clip slot number that
we want to launch. The outputs of the numboxes can be sent to pak and we can swap the
hardcoded numbers in the path above with replaceable arguments:
path live_set track $1 clip_slots $2 clip .

Of course, with this approach, the user of this device will be able to select tracks or clip slots that
don't exist in the Live set. To show a toggle that is on when the selection exists and off otherwise,
we can use that id 0 is output for paths that don't exist.

Finally, to make this a functional device, we can place this patch in a MIDI effect and use notein to
trigger the selected clip. If the velocity is not 0, we know a note on comes in. So then, if the
selected clip exists, we send call fire to it.

830

User Guide / Max for Live / Live API Overview

831

User Guide / Max for Live / Creating Max for Live Devices

Creating Max for Live Devices
Creating a New Device

832

Saving a New Device
Copying a Device

832
833

See Also

833

When you use Max for Live to create new devices, you always begin from a basic template - a Max
device that contains the necessary Max objects for receiving and transmitting audio or MIDI data to
and from other devices in the Devices area of a Live track. When you edit a Max device, you launch
the Max application, but you can continue to listen to your device in Live as you edit it thanks to a
feature known as preview mode. When your Max for Live device is complete, you can save it (along
with any presets you may wish to create) in a central library that allows you to load your patch or
preset from the Live File browser at any time in the future.

Creating a New Device
Click on the Devices button in Live's File browser to display the list of available devices.
Click on the arrow to the left of the folder marked Instruments, MIDI Effects, or Audio
Effects to show the available devices and their presets.
Click on a Max for live device in Live's File Browser and drag it to the Devices Window for a
Live Track.

Saving a New Device
To save a device, click on the close button in the patcher's title bar or choose Save from the
Max File menu. If you are saving a newly created device, a file dialog will appear and ask
where you want to save the file.
To see the current library of available devices, click on the arrow to the left of any of the
three Max for Live device folders (the Max Audio Effects folder in the Audio Effects
folder, the Max MIDI Effects folder in the MIDI Effects folder, or the Max Instruments
folder in the Instruments folder). The folder will open and any saved devices will be
displayed.

832

User Guide / Max for Live / Creating Max for Live Devices

Copying a Device
To save a copy of a Max for Live device you want to edit, choose Save As... from the File
menu. A file dialog will appear so you can give your device a new name.
When you save the device, the copy in Live will update automatically.

See Also
Creating Audio Devices and Instruments
Creating MIDI Effects
Creating MIDI Tools
Creating Live API Devices
User Interfaces in Max for Live
Working with Files
Parameters

833

User Guide / Max for Live / User Interfaces in Max for Live

User Interfaces in Max for Live
Device Width and Height

834

Defining a Fixed Device Width

834

Using a Dynamic Device Width

834

Using Presentation Mode
Creating a Presentation

834
835

Device Width and Height
By default, the width of a device created in Max for Live is based on the contents of your device
patcher. It will be slightly wider than the visible objects in your device. Alternatively, you can
explicitly define the width of your device to any size. If you change your mind, you can always reset
the device width to the default behavior. The height of all Live devices is fixed at 169 pixels.

Defining a Fixed Device Width
While your Max for Live device patcher window is open for editing, resize the window to be
desired width you would like to see in Live.
Choose Set Device Width from the View Menu.
If desired, you now can resize the patcher window to a size convenient for editing. You will
see a vertical line indicating the fixed width of the device. The width will update in Live the
next time you save the device.

Using a Dynamic Device Width
While your Max for Live device patcher window is open for editing, choose Clear Device
Width from the View Menu. The next time you save the device, the width in Live will be
determined by the contents of your patcher.

Using Presentation Mode

834

User Guide / Max for Live / User Interfaces in Max for Live

Once you have your Max device up and running, you may want to present the user with only the
user interface objects. Given the relatively small height of the Live Device view, it may be desirable
to think of your interface separately from the logical position of the user interface objects in your
patcher.

Creating a Presentation
In the unlocked Patcher window for your Max for Live device patch. select the user
interface objects you want to be visible in the Device Window by shift-clicking to select
them.
Choose Add to Presentation from the Max for Live Object menu to add the objects to the
Presentation layer. A pink border will appear around the object(s) you have selected.
Click the Presentation Mode button in the patcher toolbar to enter Presentation mode.
When you switch to Presentation Mode, only objects you have added to the Presentation
layer will be shown and the word (presentation) will appear in the title bar of the patcher
window.
While in Presentation Mode, you can reposition and change the color of user interface
object, and also use resizing handles to change the size of some user interface objects (if an
object can be resized, it will had resizing handles.
When you are satisfied with the layout of your user interface, choose Patcher Inspector
from the Max for Live View menu.
Check the Open in Presentation attribute.

835

User Guide / Max for Live / Automation

Automation
Modulating a Max for Live Device Parameter

836

Parameter Automation Data at Audio Rates

836

See Also

837

Parameters of a device whose Parameter Visibility attribute is set to Automated and Stored
are available in Live's automation editor (visible in the Arrangement view). The automation editor
permits you to draw curves or other control information that will change parameter values
automatically as the arrangement plays. The parameter data type determines the type of
automation editor shown. More on this topic soon. Another way parameter values can be changed
automatically is by using clip envelopes to modulate parameter values. While automation sets the
absolute value of a parameter, modulation adjusts the value up or down from its current value.

Modulating a Max for Live Device Parameter
Click on a Max for Live user interface object to select it and click on the Inspector icon in
the toolbar to show the Inspector.
If you have not already done so, choose Int or Float from the Type attribute's pull-down
menu to set the parameter type.
Choose the modulation mode you want to use from the Clip Modulation Mode attribute's
pull-down menu to set the parameter.
In the Live application, select the parameter, choose a modulation source, and enable
modulation as you would with any normal Live device parameter.

Parameter Automation Data at Audio Rates
While getting parameter automation data from the Live application at message rates for use in your
Max for Live device is common, some devices require that you receive parameter automation data
from the Live applcation at higher and more accurate rates. Any Max for Live device can receive its
parameter automation data in the form of a sample-accurate audio-rate ramp using the live.param~
object.

836

User Guide / Max for Live / Automation

The live.param~ object takes as an argument the name of an automatable parameter to which it is
bound. Any change to the automatable parameter's output value will be send out the outlet of the
live.param~ object at signal rate.

See Also
Parameters
Pattr

837

User Guide / Max for Live / Sharing Max for Live Devices

Sharing Max for Live Devices
To create Live devices that you can give to other people, you'll need to ensure the device is
packaged with all the files it needs. We call this freezing.

The use of the term freezing here should not be confused with the Max concept of
frozen attributes or frozen tracks in Ableton Live.

Basic freezing is explained here. If your device opens files during its operation (such as a folder of
samples or images), you may need to add these files as dependencies before freezing. Once you
freeze a device, it cannot be edited. You'll need to unfreeze it first.

If you open a frozen device for editing and see this icon in the patcher toolbar

you'll need to resolve conflicts between the files in the frozen device and those you have on disk
before you can unfreeze.

838

User Guide / Max for Live / Timing and Synchronization in Max for Live

Timing and Synchronization in Max for Live
Implementation Notes

839

The Live transport is a clock source for the Max tempo-based time system.

Implementation Notes
By default, all transport objects in Live devices (those without names) synchronize to the
Live transport.
Named transport objects do not synchronize to Live unless you set the clocksource
attribute to the name live .
If two device instances contain transport objects that share the same name, they will run
independently.
The tempo-based timing system synchronizes to Live even in preview mode. However, there
may be disruptions in the continuity of timing when switching into or out of preview mode.

839

User Guide / Max for Live Extended

Max for Live Extended

840

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Audio Effect Devices

Creating Audio Effect Devices
Defining Latency For A Device

841

A great way to start making any kind of device is to check out the Building Max Devices
pack. We highly recommend this as a tool for learning how to make specifically devices,
both Audio and MIDI.

Max for Live lets you create audio effects devices which receive audio input from the Live
application process it in some manner, and pass its audio output either back to the Live application,
or to other downstream audio effects devices in the same audio track where the device resides. By
convention, a Max for Live device gets all its audio from the Live application using the plugin~
object and sends its audio output using the plugout~ object. Audio input and output is limited to
two channels.

Sending audio to another Max for Live Audio Effect, Instrument, or MIDI Effect device
using the Max send, receive, send~, or receive~, objects is not supported. While
creating a Max for Live audio device can begin by using the Max for Live device
templates, you can use some of the Max for Live Audio devices, MIDI effects, and
Instruments that come with Max for Live as your starting point. Read more about Max
for Live limitations.

Defining Latency For A Device
When Live sends audio or when MIDI triggers audio through an effect created using Max for Live,
the events should all be time-aligned (e.g., if a MIDI note falls on the downbeat, the MIDI
Instrument's audio should also end up in the mix on the downbeat). A device can provide latency

841

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Audio Effect Devices

information to the Live host application so that the host can use latency compensation to adjust the
relative timing of different audio tracks.

When you use Max for Live, there are situations where it is useful to set latency to counteract
timing differences introduced in your signal processing. If your signal processing patch requires you
perform some kind of analysis on a block of samples before any output is produced, you can enable
latency to make sure that the output from your effect will be correctly aligned in the mix (whereas if
you are creating a device in which signal delay is what you intend, there's no problem and you don't
need to set any latency).

Setting Device Latency
With a device window as the topmost window, choose Patcher Inspector from the View
menu to show the Inspector.
Double-click in the Value column for the Defined Latency attribute to show a cursor and
text box. Type in a value for the latency value in samples, followed by a carriage return.

842

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Creating Devices that use the Live API
Querying the Live API (getting data) using Max for Live objects

844

Querying the Live API

845

Setting a property in the Live API using Max for Live objects

846

Setting a Live API property

848

Observing a property in the Live API using Max for Live objects
Observing a Live API property

849
851

Calling a function in the Live API using Max for Live objects

853

Calling a function of a Live API property

854

Automating device parameters at signal rate

855

Controlling a property using the live.remote~ object

857

Max for Live provides two different ways to access the Live application directly through the Live
API:

You can use a trio of Max for Live objects - (live.object, live.observer, and live.path) to
access, observe, and control the Live application.
You can use the Max js object to write code using the Live API Javascript object that
exposes the Live Object Model.
Regardless of which method you decide to use, online documentation for the Live Object Model
describes the properties and functions of a Live session that can be queried and set and observed.
You can get or set values, call functions, and observe the status of properties using the Live API
from any kind of Max for Live device on any channel. The Live API is described in this overview.

The Live Object Model divides the Live application into several basic functional units (properties)
associated with aspects of the Live application - the application itself, Songs, Tracks, Clip slots,
Clips, Devices, Device Parameters, the Mixer Device, Scenes, Cue Points, And Control Surfaces. The
Live API provides ways to access some properties of the application to control how the Live
application displays them to you (Application.View, Song.View, and Track.View). Your use of the Live
API involves one of four kinds of different operations:

843

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

You can query (get) the current state of a property of your current Live session.
You can set the state of some properties of your current Live session
Some properties can be controlled using functions that perform various actions (e.g. firing a
clip).
Some properties can be observed (i.e. their current state is reported and updated
automatically). The Live Object Model provides a complete reference to which objects can
be queried, set, and observed, as well as a listing of the functions associated with them.

Querying the Live API (getting data) using Max for Live objects
You can use the Max for Live live.path and live.object objects to find out the current state of any
property defined in the Live Object Model reference.

The live.path object is used to navigate to the Live object properties you wish to query. Each
property of the Live object model in a session is associated with an id specific to that particular
Song, Track, Clip, Clip Slot, Device, etc. Sending a message to a live.path object results in an object
id being sent out the left outout (where the id follows the object) or middle outlet (where the id
follows the path). In turn, the live.object object takes the id message from the live.path object and
lets you use get messages to get information about the properties of the object. The result of the
query is sent out the outlet of the live.object object, preceded by the name of the query.

844

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Querying the Live API
Using the Live Object Model, find the canonical path listing for the property (in
this case, the Track properties). This part of the Live Object Model listing
displays its canonical path - the syntax for queries about the Track in a Live
session.

Find the listing in the Live Object Model page for the query you want to make
(in this example, we want to to see whether or not Track 3 is muted).

The listing from the Live Object Model listing for the mute property of a Live Track
lists its Type as bool (boolean, 0 = off, 1 = on), and its Access as get, set, observe, which
means that this property can be queried or set or observed (there's also an indication
that Live Master Tracks cannot be queried or set).

Use amessage boxto construct a message to be sent to the live.path object
telling it the name of the property we want to query - Track 3 (by convention,
track numbering in the Live API starts from 0). In this case, the message is
path live_set tracks 2 .

845

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

The live.path object responds with the message id N , where N is the id number
associated with Track 3.

use a Max trigger object to set up a sequence of operations. When the trigger
object receives the list output, it sends the id message to the live.object object's
right inlet, and then sends a bang message to themessage boxcontaining the
symbol get , followed by the name of the property being queried. In response,
the live.object object sends the message mute 0 out the left outlet of the
live.object object

Setting a property in the Live API using Max for Live objects
You can also use the Max for Live live.path and live.object objects to set the current state of many
properties defined in the Live Object Model reference. The live.path object is used to navigate to
the Live objects you wish to query. Each property of the Live object model in a session is associated
with an id specific to that particular Song, Track, Clip, Clip Slot, Device, etc. Sending a message to a
live.path object results in an object id being sent out the left outout (where the id follows the
object) or middle outlet (where the id follows the path). In turn, the live.object object takes the id
message from the live.path object and lets you use set messages, followed by arguments that

846

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

specify the new setting to set the state of a property. In this example, we'll use a set message to
mute Track 3 of a Live session.

847

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Setting a Live API property
Using the Live Object Model, find the canonical path listing for the property (in
this case, the Track properties). This part of the Live Object Model listing
displays its canonical path - the syntax for queries about the Track in a Live
session.

Find the listing in the Live Object Model page for the query you want to make
(in this example, we want to to see whether or not Track 3 is muted).

The listing from the Live Object Model listing for the mute property of a Live Track
lists its Type as bool (boolean, 0 = off, 1 = on), and its Access as get, set, observe, which
means that this property can be set as well as queried and observed (there's also an
indication that Live Master Tracks cannot be queried or set).

Use amessage boxto construct a message to be sent to the live.path object
telling it the name of the property we want to query - Track 3 (by convention,
track numbering in the Live API starts from 0). In this case, the message is
path live_set tracks 3 .

848

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

The live.path object responds with the message id N , where N is the id number
associated with Track 3.

Use a Max trigger object to set up a sequence of operations. When the trigger
object receives the list output, it sends the id message to the live.object object's
right inlet, and then sends a bang message to themessage boxcontaining the
message set , followed by the name of the property we want to set and its new
value - in this case, set mute 1 .
When you save and close the device and click on the upper message box, Track 3 will
be muted.

Observing a property in the Live API using Max for Live objects
Some properties in the Live API can be observed. The Live API not only reports the current state of a
property in response to a query when it is observed, but also subsequently updates the state of that

849

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

property if it changes. Observing a property using the Live API uses the live.path object also used
for getting and setting properties, but also uses the live.observer objects to perform the task. The
live.path object is used to navigate to the Live objects whose functions you want to call. Each
property of the Live object model in a session is associated with an id specific to that particular
Song, Track, Clip, Clip Slot, Device, etc. Sending a message to a live.path object results in an object
id being sent out the left outout (where the id follows the object) or middle outlet (where the id
follows the path). In turn, the live.observer object takes the id message from the live.path object
and lets you use property messages to define what property of the object you want to observe. In
this example, we'll observe whether or not Track 3 of our session is muted or not.

850

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Observing a Live API property
Using the Live Object Model, find the canonical path listing for the property (in
this case, the Track properties). This part of the Live Object Model listing
displays its canonical path - the syntax for queries about the Track in a Live
session.

Find the listing in the Live Object Model page for the property you wish to
observe. Not all properties may be observed via the Live API (in this example,
we want to to observe the behavior of muting on Track 3).

The listing from the Live Object Model listing for the mute property of a Live Track
lists its Type as bool (boolean, 0 = off, 1 = on), and its Access as get, set, observe, which
means that this property can be observed (there's also an indication that Live Master
Tracks cannot be observed).

Use amessage boxto construct a message to be sent to the live.path object
telling it the name of the property we want to query - Track 3 (by convention,

851

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

track numbering in the Live API starts from 0). In this case, the message is
path live_set tracks 3 .

The live.path object responds with the message id N , where N is the id number
associated with Track 3.

Use a Max trigger object to set up a sequence of operations. When the trigger
object receives the list output, it sends the id message to the live.observer
object's right inlet, and then sends a bang message to themessage
boxcontaining the message property , followed by the name of the property
we want to observe - in this case, property mute .
When you save and close the device and click on the upper message box while Track 3
is playing, you'll notice that the patch displays a 0 (unmuted). If you mute the track by
clicking on the Track Activator button, you'll see the output of the live.observer object
change to a 1 (muted). As you unmute and mute the track, the value will change.

852

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Calling a function in the Live API using Max for Live objects
The Live API also includes various kinds of functions that are used to perform activities such as
changing various aspects of the Live application's interface display (View) or controlling the playing
of clips or scenes. You can also use the Max for Live live.path and live.object objects to call
(perform) these functions. The live.path object is used to navigate to the Live objects whose
functions you want to call. Each property of the Live object model in a session is associated with an
id specific to that particular Song, Track, Clip, Clip Slot, Device, etc. Sending a message to a live.path
object results in an object id being sent out the left outout (where the id follows the object) or
middle outlet (where the id follows the path). In turn, the live.object object takes the id message
from the live.path object and lets you use call messages, followed by arguments that specify the
name of the function you're calling and any data for the function in the form of arguments to
execute the function. In this example, we'll use a fire function to play the clip in slot 2 or Track 2
of a Live session.

853

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Calling a function of a Live API property
Using the Live Object Model, find the canonical path listing for the property (in
this case, the ClipSlot properties). This part of the Live Object Model listing
displays its canonical path - the syntax for queries about the ClipSlot in a Live
session.

Find the listing in the Live Object Model page for the property's functions (in
this example, we want to fire (launch) the clip in clip slot 2 on Track 2).

The listing from the Live Object Model listing for the fire function of the ClipSlot
property indicates that it needs no other data arguments.

Use amessage boxto construct a message to be sent to the live.path object
telling it the name of the property we want to query - Clip Slot 2 or Track 2 (by
convention, all numbering in the Live API starts from 0). In this case, the
message is path live_set tracks 1 clip_slots 1 .

854

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

The live.path object responds with the message id N , where N is the id number
associated with Clip Slot 2 of Track 2.

Use a Max trigger object to set up a sequence of operations. When the trigger
object receives the list output, it sends the id message to the live.observer
object's right inlet, and then sends a bang message to themessage
boxcontaining the message call , followed by the name of the function - in
this case, call fire .
When you save and close the device and click on the upper message box while Track
any other clip in any other clip slot in Track 2 is playing, you'll notice that the clip in Clip
Slot 2 is launched.

Automating device parameters at signal rate

855

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

The live.object is designed to mimic user interactions with the Live Session (and adds to undo
history), so there are some situations that involve rapid modulation of device parameters where the
object may not be appropriate. The live.remote~ object allows you to directly modulate the
parameters of any "remotely mappable" control in Live at signal rate. As with setting values and
calling functions, the live.path object is used to navigate to the Live objects whose functions you
want to control. Each property of the Live object model in a session is associated with an id specific
to that particular Song, Track, Clip, Clip Slot, Device, etc. Sending a message to a live.path object
results in an object id being sent out the left outout (where the id follows the object) or middle
outlet (where the id follows the path). In turn, the live.remote~ object takes the id message from
the live.path object and accepts signal data in its left inlet which is used to modulate or control the
Live API property. In the following example, we'll use the output of a cycle~ object to control the
sends on an audio track.

856

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Controlling a property using the live.remote~ object
Using the Live Object Model, find the canonical path listing for the property (in
this case, the MixerDevice properties). This part of the Live Object Model listing
displays its canonical path - the syntax for queries about the Track in a Live
session.

Find the listing in the Live Object Model page for the property you wish to
control (in this example, we want to to control the first send on Track 1).
Remember that numbering in the Live API starts from zero by convention.
Use amessage boxto construct a message to be sent to the live.path object
telling it the name of the property we want to control. In this case, the message
is path live_set tracks 0 mixer_device sends 0 .
The live.path object responds with the message id N , where N is the id number
associated with the first send on Track 1.

857

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating Devices that use the Live API

Add some logic to produce signal-rate data to control the property. In this case,
we're using a cycle~ device to use a sinusoidal waveform and then using the
abs~ (absolute value) object to keep the output in the positive signal range.

When you save and close the device and click on the upper message box while Track 1
is playing, you'll notice that the dial for Send A on Track one moves at the rate you
specify for the cycle~ object.

858

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating MIDI Effects

Creating MIDI Effects
Capturing a portion of the MIDI data stream in Max for Live

859

Redirecting a part of a MIDI data stream

860

A great way to start making any kind of device is to check out the Building Max Devices
pack. We highly recommend this as a tool for learning how to make specifically devices,
both Audio and MIDI.

Max for Live lets you create MIDI effects devices which receive MIDI information from the Live
application, perform some operation on that data (e.g. mapping incoming notes to a user-definied
musical scale), and then pass MIDI data downstream to another MIDI effect or to a MIDI
Instrument - the last device in a MIDI effects chain (although the audio output of the instrument
may be further processed by any number of Audio effects devices). By convention, Max for Live
gets all its MIDI data from the Live application using the midiin object, and all of that data must all
be passed downstream to other MIDI devices by means of the midiout object. Max for Live
provides a means to redirect portions of an incoming MIDI data stream for processing while leaving
the rest of the stream unchanged, as described below.

Also by convention, all Max for Live MIDI devices receive audio on MIDI channel 1. You can receive
receive MIDI data in your Max for Live MIDI Effects device on a channel number other than 1 by
routing the MIDI input as described here. Max for Live provides several tutorials and example MIDI
effects devices you can try, study, and modify:

Capturing a portion of the MIDI data stream in Max for Live
Max for Live requires that all MIDI data coming into a MIDI Effects device be passed downstream.
There are situations in which you may want to use only a portion of the incoming MIDI data stream
- to select only MIDI notes in a given range, or input from specific MIDI continuous controllers for
use in your device. The Max midiselect object lets you specify portions of an incoming MIDI data

859

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Creating MIDI Effects

stream to filter out for further processing in your device, and passes any other MIDI data out
unchanged.

Redirecting a part of a MIDI data stream
In your unlocked patch, add a midiselect object and connect its inlet to the outlet of the
midiin object in your MIDI Effect or MIDI Instrument template file.
Following the name of the midiselect object enter the attributes corresponding to the MIDI
data you want to filter out of the data stream, followed by any arguments that specify
additional data (MIDI channel numbers, MIDI controller numbers, etc.). Attributes names
begin with an at-sign (@), and there is no space following it and the type of data you want to
filter out. The data types are:
ch: MIDI channel (only used when routing MIDI data from a non-channel 1 source, as
described below)
note: MIDI note data
ctl: MIDI controller data
bend: pitchbend data
pgm: MIDI program change messages
touch: Aftertouch data
poly: Polyphonic aftertouch data
Connect the input of the midiout object in your MIDI Effect or MIDI Instrument template
file to the right outlet of the midiselect object. Any data you do not specify when you
instantiate the object or data you select by sending messages to the midiselect object will
be passed downstream without being edited.

860

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

Device Parameters in Max for Live
Live UI Objects

861

Parameter Data Types

862

Setting an initial state for a Live UI object

863

Setting an initial state for a standard Max UI object

864

Parameter Modulation

864

Enabling Parameter Modulation

864

Parameter Names
Setting the display name for a parameter

865
865

Setting a custom unit style

866

Controlling a parameter's visibility

866

Parameters are settings of Max for Live devices you want to store and/or automate in Live. In some
cases, a parameter may be set once and never change. In other cases, you'll want to use Max
objects to interact with parameter values by clicking and moving the mouse, by receiving MIDI data
mapped to a parameter, or via Live automation.

There are a few ways to add parameters to your device. The most straightforward method is to use
Live UI objects. By default, each Live UI object and its corresponding value is stored in the Live set.
Alternatively, you are able to configure Max UI objects to also have this behaviour and be stored in
the Live document by setting Parameter Mode Enable to true. Another option is to use pattr.

The Parameters Window shows all parameters currently associated with a device, and permits you
to change parameter attributes in a single place. You can also change parameter attributes for
individual objects by using the Parameter tab of the Inspector.

Live UI Objects
Max for Live includes user interface objects designed to work with the parameter system whose
names all begin with live. . These objects have some special abilities:

861

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

They allow you to set an initial state that will be recalled automatically when a device is
instantiated, saved, or edited.
They work seamlessly with Live's MIDI and keyboard mapping capabilities.
If you choose to make the UI object's parameter automatable, you can control it with Live's
automation facility.
In other respects, the Live UI objects act like ordinary Max user interface objects.

Parameter Data Types
Parameters used in Max for Live can be one of four types:

integer: integer values with a range of up to 256 values (default 0-255)
floating-point: floating point values (no range restriction)
enum: an enumerated list of items
blob: parameters that cannot be automated but can be stored in presets. Non-automatable
parameters may be any type of data you can store with a pattr object: single values, lists, or
strings.

862

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

Working with Integer parameters requiring more than 256 values
The native integer representation is limited to the 0-255 range. If you need an integer
type that exceeds this range then instead set the type to Float, and change the unit
style to Int

Select an object and click the Inspector icon on the Patcher toolbar to show the
object's Inspector
Choose Float from the pull-down menu in the Type attribute's Value column.
Choose Int from the pull-down menu in the Unit Style attribute's Value column.
The native integer representation is limited to 256 values, with a default range of 0255. When working with Live UI objects whose integer values will exceed this range,
the Type attribute should be set to Float, and the Unit Style attribute should be set to
Int:

Although the parameter value will be stored as a floating-point number, it will be
displayed as an integer.

The native integer representation is limited to 256 values, with a default range of 0255. When working with Live UI objects whose integer values will exceed this range,
the Type attribute should be set to Float, and the Unit Style attribute should be set to
Int:

Setting an initial state for a Live UI object
Select the Max for Live UI object and click the Inspector icon in the Patcher toolbar to show
the object's Inspector.
Scroll down to the Parameter section to see the Parameter attributes.
Check the Initial Enable checkbox.
Enter a floating-point value for the Initial Value attribute.

863

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

Setting an initial state for a standard Max UI object
Add a pattr object to your patch, typing the parameter name you want to use as an
argument to the object. Connect the pattr object's middle (bindto) outlet to the Max UI
object.
Select the pattr object and open the Inspector. Scroll down to the Parameter section to see
the Parameter attributes.
Check the Parameter Mode Enable checkbox.
Check the Initial Enable checkbox.
Enter a floating-point value for the Initial Value attribute.

Parameter Modulation
Parameters can be modulated by clip envelopes in Live according to one of four modes:

In unipolar mode, the parameter value is modulated between the minimum range value (set
using the Clip Modulation Range attribute) and its current value.
In bipolar mode, the full modulation range of a parameter is equal to twice the distance
between the current value and nearest boundary set using the parameter’s
Clip Modulation Range attribute. If the current value is exactly halfway between the
lower and upper ranges, the modulation range is equal to the total parameter range.
In additive mode, the modulation range from the current value is equal to plus or minus onehalf of the total range of the parameter. Values are truncated if they fall outside of the
Clip Modulation Range attribute.

In absolute mode, the current value is either the upper or lower bound of the modulation
range. If the current value is less than half of the full parameter range, the modulation
assumes a lower range of the current value minus the modulation range. If the current value
is greater than half of the full parameter range, the modulation assumes the upper range is
current value and the lower range is equal to the current value minus the modulation range
value.

Enabling Parameter Modulation

864

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

Select the parameter object (pattr or Live UI) and open the inspector. Click the Parameter
tab to show the parameter attributes.
Set the Clip Modulation Mode and, if applicable, the Clip Modulation Range
attributes.

Parameter Names
Max for Live provides several ways to give a parameterised object a name using attributes. These
attributes can be set using the guidelink[Inspector]#inspector.

The Scripting Name attribute can be used to identify a UI object when used in
conjunction with the Max pattr preset objects. When a UI object has a scripting name set, it
will automatically appear in the pattrstorage object's inventory of parameter names when
you add an autopattr object to your Max patch as described in the pattr Chapter 2 tutorial.
The Short Name attribute can be used in conjunction with the Display Parameter Name
attribute to label live.dial and live.slider object when you use them in a device.
The Long Name attribute is be used to identify a parameter to the Live application's
Parameter automation and MIDI mapping. You can use a single name for all three of these
attributes by checking the Link to Scripting Name attribute in the object's Inspector.
You may find this to be a simple approach to managing paramter naming.

Setting the display name for a parameter
Add a Max for Live UI object to your device. When the UI object first appears, it displays
the name of the object itself.

Select a the object and click the Inspector icon on the Patcher toolbar to show the object's
Inspector.
Double-click in the Value column for the Short Name setting to show a cursor and text box.
Type in a name for the parameter, followed by a carriage return. The Value column will be

865

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

de-selected, and your parameter name will appear in the object's display.

Note: If your short name is too long, it will be automatically truncated. If you are using a live.slider
or live.gain~ object, you can use resize the object manually by clicking in the lower right-hand
corner of the object and dragging. If you are using a live.dial object, you should enter a new
horizontal value for the Patching Rectangle or Presentation Rectangle attributes using the
object's Inspector.

Setting a custom unit style
Select a Max for Live UI object and click the Inspector icon on the Patcher toolbar to show
the object's Inspector.
Choose Custom from the Unit Style pulldown menu.
Double-click in the Value column of the Custom Units attribute to show a cursor and text
box. Type in a string to be used for the custom unit style, followed by a carriage return. The
Value column will be de-selected, and the name will be set.

You can type in custom unit strings as symbols (e.g. "Harmonic(s)"), in which case the
parameter's value will be displayed in its 'Native' display mode, followed by the symbol (e.g.
"12 Harmonic(s)" for an Int-typed parameter or "12.54 Harmonic(s)" for a Float-typed
parameter). If you would like to have additional control over the numerical component
displayed, you can enter a sprintf-style string (e.g. "%0.2f Bogon(s)", which would display a
value such as ".87 Bogons").

Controlling a parameter's visibility
You can change the visibility of a parameter by changing the Parameter Visibility
setting in the Inspector. If this attribute is set to Automated and Stored, the parameter will
be stored in the Live Set and presets, and will be available for automation. If this attribute is
set to Stored Only, the value will be stored, but it will not be visible to Live's automation

866

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Device Parameters in Max for Live

system. If this attribute is set to Hidden, it will neither be stored nor available for
automation.
You may want to have a parameter Hidden when it affects other Max for Live parameters.
This will prevent problems with overloading Live's undo buffer, and will also limit issues with
preset storage.

867

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Freezing Max for Live Devices

Freezing Max for Live Devices
Freezing a Device

868

Freezing a Max device prepares it for distribution. A frozen device contains files it needs to operate.
These files might include subpatchers, audio files, image files, Javascript code, or third-party Max
external objects. When you freeze a device that contains third-party external objects, you can
include both Windows and Macintosh versions of the external in your Max search path, if you have
them both. The frozen device will then will contain both versions, and will work on both platforms.
Max analyzes your device to find any files it uses (called dependencies), and then combines these
files with your device. When a frozen device is opened, the files inside the device are used, even if
similarly named files reside on your disk in the Max search path.

Freezing a Device
Click the Freeze button in the device window toolbar.

868

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Freezing Max for Live Devices

Choose Save from the File menu to save the device. The device is now frozen and is
reloaded in Live in its frozen state.
Note that the device is not frozen immediately when you click the freeze button. It is frozen when
you save it. Before saving, you can make further changes to the device after clicking the Freeze
button by clicking the Freeze button again to unfreeze. When your changes are finished, click the
Freeze button again, then choose Save from the File menu.

869

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live Limitations

Max for Live Limitations
Audio Limitations
MC Limitations

871
871

MIDI Driver Limitations

871

pattr and Max for Live Parameters

872

Other Limitations

872

Max and Max for Live are two separate products. The version of Max that comes bundled with Live
is optimized for use with Live, but it is not the full Max 9 application, and is not intended to be used
outside the context of Live. If you only have a Max for Live license, and not a full Max license, then
the Max application will have certain limitations.

Limitation

Description

Save patches using Gen,

You will still be able to load and run Max for Live devices using

MC, and Jitter Geometry

these advanced Max features, but you will not be able to author
your own Max patches using these faetures.

Gen code export

You will not be able to export C code from any of the Gen
objects, like gen~ and jit.gl.pix.

Integrated OSC Support

Objects like udpreceive and udpsend will still work, but
integrated OSC support will not be functional.

Direct Audio Driver Access

Audio input/output will be limited to the particular Max for Live

(Multichannel Audio)

device. See Audio Limitations for more details.

Unlimited MIDI Hardware
Messages (sysex, program

MIDI input and output will be limited to those messages that
Live will recognize and pass between devices.

changes, etc.)
Direct MIDI Driver Access

MIDI input and output will be limited to those MIDI messages
sent directly between Live devices. You will not have direct
access to your system's MIDI Drivers. See MIDI Driver
Limitations for more details.

870

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live Limitations

Standalone Operation (Run Max

You will only be able to use Max inside of Live, and will not

without Live)

be able to run Max on its own.

Audio Limitations
When authorized only via Live, the Max application will not use its own audio drivers. Its audio
input is the input to the Max for Live device you are editing, and its audio output is the output from
that Max for Live device. Audio I/O works when using preview mode. If you turn preview mode off,
all audio I/O for the Max application will stop.

If Max and MSP are authorized when editing a Live device, Max Consoles that are not a part of the
Live device will use the regular Max audio drivers.

The use of the send~ and receive~ objects to pass audio between Max for Live devices is not
supported.

MC Limitations
User initiated connections for MC patches are prohibited with only a Max for Live authorization.
Runtime behavior and scripted connections will work, but in order to add new connections, a
standalone Max authorization is required.

MIDI Driver Limitations
When authorized only via Live, the Max application will not use its own MIDI drivers. MIDI input
arrives from Live and MIDI output is sent to Live. MIDI I/O works only when using preview mode. If
you turn preview mode off, all MIDI I/O for the Max application will stop.

When you open a Max patcher file such as a help file containing Max MIDI objects, the MIDI
output will be sent to the MIDI output of the device you are currently editing. If you open a file
containing MIDI objects when you are not editing a device, there will be no MIDI I/O.

871

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live Limitations

If Max is authorized when editing a Live device, Max Consoles that are not a part of the Live device
will use the regular Max MIDI drivers for MIDI objects.

pattr and Max for Live Parameters
Although the pattr objectscan be used in the context of Max for Live, there are some differences
compared to normal Max use.

The autopattr object cannot be used to batch-register objects with the Parameter system. You need
to use individual pattr objects for this purpose.

The pattr object functions mostly identically under Max and Max for Live. However, some users
might expect the value of a pattr object in a Max for Live device to be automatically maintained by
the Live Set upon save and close, and to be correctly restored when the Set is re-opened. This is
not the case. This behavior is available, but only if the pattr object's Parameter Mode Enable
attribute is enabled in the object's Inspector and the Parameter Visibility attribute is set to '
Automated and Stored or Stored Only' .

The pattrstorage object also functions mostly identically under Max for Live, but there are a few
important distinctions to keep in mind, if the object is in Parameter Mode. First, the value of the
pattrstorage object in Parameter Mode is its entire storage state (what is ordinarily saved to an
external file), rather than the currently recalled slot. This means that devices using pattrstorage in
Parameter Mode need not require an external file to recall the storage state of the object (it can be
saved in presets, set as an initial value or stored in the Set). Use of an external file can be disabled
using by setting the object's savemode attribute to 0. If the pattrstorage object has an Initial Value,
the savemode and autorestore attributes are ignored and file-less use of the object is assumed.
Finally, the pattrstorage object has an additional attribute when in Parameter Mode: Auto-update
Parameter Initial Value. When this is enabled and Initial Enable is turned on, all changes to the
object's storage state will cause the Initial Value to auto-update to the new state.

Other Limitations
The grab object cannot be used to communicate from a send to a receive between devices.

872

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live Limitations

When authorized only via Live, Max cannot build standalones or collectives. Frozen devices, which
Max for Live creates, are very similar to collectives.

873

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Max for Live MIDI Tools
Types of MIDI Tools

874

Creating a New Max for Live MIDI Tool

875

Anatomy of a MIDI Tool

875

Creating A Transformation

876

Apply Cycle
Creating a Generator

885
885

Next Steps

890

Common Errors and How To Handle Them

890

Limitations

891

Please note: Max for Live MIDI Tools can only be used in version 12.0 or greater of Live.

Max for Live MIDI Tools are a distinct type of Max for Live device designed to manipulate and
generate MIDI data in a Live MIDI Clip. These tools offer versatility by allowing you to craft patches
capable of generating MIDI data from the ground up or of reshaping existing MIDI data. For
example, you could create a MIDI Tool that produces rhythms according to a specific generative
algorithm, or use a Transformation to fine tune the properties of notes in a clip. Given this, MIDI
Tools unlocks a myriad of creative possibilities and streamline the execution of repetitive
algorithmic tasks on MIDI data within the Live environment.

Types of MIDI Tools
Within the domain of Max for Live MIDI Tools, there are two distinct types of devices in the .amxd
format: a "Generator" and a "Transformation". A Generator can be used to create new MIDI data
from scratch while a Transformation can be used to transform existing MIDI data in a Clip. As you
will come to understand later, the differences in patching between these two types of devices are
slim and sometimes non-existent. However, there are subtle divergences in how data passes
between Live and Max and the expectations with respect to user experience. At the end of the day,
the takeaway message is that generation and transformation are two distinct MIDI Tool device

874

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

types that you need to be aware of. If your aim is to add new notes to a clip, you'll want to create a
Generator. If you want to edit the properties of existing notes, you'll want to create a
Transformation.

Creating a New Max for Live MIDI Tool
To create a new Max for Live MIDI Tool, you can load either the "MIDI Generator Template" or
"MIDI Transformation Template" device that are both available in their respective dropdown menus
of the Tool Tabs. Once loaded, you can save, which will prompt you to create a copy of it under a
new name. Now, you should see a new MIDI Tool available in the Tool Tabs dropdown menu.
Clicking its name will load the device.

Anatomy of a MIDI Tool
The basic anatomy of a MIDI Tool can be structured into three parts: an input, an output and some
data manipulation between these two points.

live.miditool.in

875

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

In the same way that a MIDI Effect uses notein or midiin to receive MIDI data, or an Audio Effect
uses plugin~ to receive audio input, a Max for Live MIDI Tool uses an object called live.miditool.in.
This object only works inside of Max for Live MIDI Tools. This object, live.miditool.in, is a kind of
"portal" between the currently focused Clip and a loaded Max for Live MIDI Tool. It outputs two
valuable bits of information from its outlets: the note information and some contextual information
about the Clip itself such as but not limited to the grid interval, selection time and selected scale.

live.miditool.out
Just as live.miditool.in is the only way to receive MIDI data from a Clip, live.miditool.out is the only
way to send MIDI data back to a Clip in order to transform some existing notes, or generate new
ones. Take note that live.miditool.out also only works inside of a Max for Live MIDI Tool.

MIDI Tool Logic
Between the live.miditool.in and live.miditool.out objects is where the logic of your Max for Live
MIDI Tool is defined. In this part of the patch you will receive note and context data from the
respective outlets of live.miditool.in as a dict. Using this information, you can then manipulate the
note data and send it back to the live.miditool.out object which will update the corresponding Clip
in Live. You can also ignore the data that comes out of live.miditool.in and generate your own data
from scratch, for instance in a Generator.

Creating A Transformation
Now that you understand what a MIDI Tool is for as well as the general anatomy, let's create a
simple Max for Live MIDI Transformation that will transpose all the notes in a Clip by a user-defined
amount.

Step 1: Create A New MIDI Tool Transformation
As described above, let's create a new Max for Live MIDI Tool by duplicating the existing "MIDI
Transformation Template". Give it a unique name, and then open it in the Max editor by clicking the
edit button which is located to the left below the MIDI Tool's interface.

876

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Step 2: Receive Data from the Clip
So now that we have a template MIDI Tool ready to go, let's dive into actually patching, and trying
to understand the data output by the live.miditool.in object. Remember, it outputs the note

877

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

information and some contextual information about the Clip itself from the left and right outlets
respectively.

If you aren't too familiar with dictionaries or the dict object, visiting the help files is a
good place to start.

It outputs both of these bits of information whenever you send a bang message to the inlet of
live.miditool.in or when you press the "Apply" button underneath the MIDI Tool in Live's user
interfaces. It is important to note now that there are differences between sending a bang message
and pressing the "Apply" button, but we will discuss that later.

For now, we are mostly going to ignore the right outlet and focus instead on the left outlet which
outputs note data. To understand the data better and how it arrives in Max, we can attach a
dict.view object to the left outlet of live.miditool.in and then send a bang to the live.miditool.in
object. This will cause the object to output the note data as a dictionary of the Clip that is currently
in focus.

878

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Note that live.miditool.in won't output anything when it is loaded in a Transformation
AMXD unless there are MIDI notes in the Clip.

To summarise, the note dict that is output from live.miditool.in contains a "notes" key which is
associated to an array of sub-dictionaries which each represent a single note. Below is a textual
representation of this data structure using a Clip that has just two notes in it:

{
"notes" : [ // the brackets denote the start of an array
// this here is the first note
{
"note_id" : 9,
"pitch" : 60,
"start_time" : 0.0,
"duration" : 0.25,
"velocity" : 127,
"mute" : 0,
"probability" : 1,
"velocity_deviation" : 0,
"release_velocity" : 0
}
// this here is the second note
{

,

"note_id" : 10,
"pitch" : 61,
"start_time" : 0.25,
"duration" : 0.25,
"velocity" : 127,
"mute" : 0,
"probability" : 1,
"velocity_deviation" : 0,
"release_velocity" : 0
}
],
}

879

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

If we want to transform this Clip represented by a dictionary, we have to iterate through each subdictionary representing a note and modify the properties we are interested in mutating. For
example, if we want to pitch shift all the notes up by 1 semitone, we must add 1 to the "pitch"
property of each sub-dictionary.

Step 3: Transforming the Data
To coordinate the Transformation, we need to first extract the array of sub-dictionaries that
represent each note in the Clip. By using dict.unpack and making the first argument notes: , we
can extract this array. Then, we can then iterate over the sub-dictionaries and transform the pitch
property of each one to realise the total pitch shift effect. Importantly, all the other properties need
to be left intact, so as to not change, for example, the duration or start time.

Once we have just the array of sub-dictionaries, we are going to use the array.map object. A
straightforward mapping example would be to take an array of numbers and add 1 to each element.
In Max, this would look like the following:

880

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

When you supply an array to array.map it iterates over each element, outputting it from the second
outlet. Each time this happens, array.map will wait for some input from the second inlet. Whatever
the object receives when it is waiting will overwrite the original value in the array. Once all the
elements have been processed, the object will output the final result from the first outlet. In the
case of this pitch shift example, we want to take each sub-dictionary from the array, and add a
positive or negative offset to the "pitch" value. At each iteration we have to unpack the pitch value
from the sub-dictionary, add the offset, and then pack it back together in order to preserve all the
data we did not change (start_time, velocity, etc.). This can be done with the dict.unpack and
dict.pack objects. To keep things simpler for now, we're just going to make the offset a fixed value
of 1 in MIDI note numbers.

The keys of a dictionary that aren't explicitly unpacked with dict.unpack are output by
the right-most outlet. The right-most inlet of dict.pack can be connected to this outlet
so that any unaltered keys are reassembled with the modified properties. This is useful
for when you want to only transform a few properties of a dictionary and leave the rest
untouched.

The only thing left to do is take the array of sub-dictionaries that we just transformed and wrap it
back up in a dictionary with a "notes" key. This ensures that the array containing sub-dictionaries

881

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

is formed back into the same structure that we first saw from the output of live.miditool.in. To do
this we use dict.pack and make the first argument notes: . Once you're at this stage your patch
should look like this:

You can now transform notes in a Live Clip by pressing the apply button, or sending live.miditool.in
a bang . You should see that the notes are shifted by 1 semitone upwards.
Summary
To quickly summarise, the patching workflow for a Transformation follows these steps each time:1)
1. Extract the array of note sub-dictionaries from the dict output from live.miditool.in

1. Extract the array of note sub-dictionaries from the dict output from live.miditool.in
2. Process the array of note sub-dictionaries
3. Pack the array of note sub-dictionaries back into a dict with a "notes" key
4. Send the dict to live.miditool.out
Step 4: Adding a User Interface

882

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

You will probably want to add some controls to the Transformation, in this case so that you can alter
the amount of transposition. To do this, add a live.numbox to the patch. We can use the output of
this live.numbox to set the amount of shift as well as trigger the Transformation. First though, let's
set the range of the parameter to something useful, like -12 to 12, giving us an octave of shift in
both a positive and negative direction.

Now that we've done that, we need to connect the output of the live.numbox to the + object.
However, we still need to trigger the Transformation every time we modify this parameter value. To
do this we also must send a bang to the live.miditool.in object. We should coordinate this with a
trigger object to guarantee those things happen in the correct order: first set the offset and then
trigger with a bang .

883

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

We can also tidy this up and put the parameter into presentation mode so that it is cleaner and
simpler to use the Transformation while we are not editing it. We should also set the patcher to
open in presentation mode, by editing this property in the patcher inspector.

884

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Apply Cycle
Typically, part of using a Transformation or Generator involves a process where you adjust
parameters to fine-tune the result you want. When you do this, and change the parameters of a
MIDI Tool in Live, you might notice that the result of a transformation can always be reverted, and
you are able to get back to the state of the Clip from before you started experimenting. Take our
simple pitch shift MIDI Tool we just built as an example. If you had a Clip with a single MIDI note at
C3, and you then set the live.dial to 4, you would see that the MIDI Note now appears as E3. If you
then turn the dial back to 0, you would see the note return to C3. The reason that this behavior can
happen is because of the apply cycle. The apply cycle is responsible for managing "snapshots" of the
Clip that are sent as dictionaries to Max for processing. When you send a bang to live.miditool.in
or press the apply button in Live's interface, an apply cycle starts. An apply cycle ends when you
perform any interactions outside of the MIDI Tool. While you are inside an apply cycle, the
dictionary output by live.miditool.inwill always contain the same note data. So, when the logic of your
patch adds 1 to the pitch of each note, it is always applying this change to the dictionary it received
at the start of the apply cycle. This is to prevent a scenario in which the transformation result is
then immediately reflected in the next output of live.miditool.in. If that were the case, a "feedback
loop" would be created where you would not be able to return to the original state of the clip.

Creating a Generator
Creating a Generator is similar to creating a Transformation in terms of patching. The main
difference is that you will be generating the note dictionary data from scratch rather than
transforming existing note data output by the live.miditool.in object. In the following example, we
will create a Generator that creates a randomised rhythm with 16th notes.

Step 1: Create A New MIDI Tool Generator
Create a new Max for Live MIDI Tool by opening the existing "MIDI Generator Template" and saving
it. Give it a unique name, and then open it in the Max editor by clicking the edit button in the
bottom left.

Step 2: Generating Data
We've already had a glimpse of the shape of the data that represents a Clip and is output as a dict
from live.miditool.in when making a Transformation. For a Generator, we can generate whatever

885

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

note data we would like to, as long as we pass it to Live via the live.miditool.out object and in the
correct format.

This code example shows all the properties that you can supply to create notes from
scratch in a Generator. Notice that you don't have to supply the "node_id" property
that can be seen when notes are passed from the Clip to the MIDI Tool. Only "pitch" ,
"start_time" and "duration" are required. The rest are optional.

{
"notes" : [
{
"pitch" : 60,
"start_time" : 0.0,
"duration" : 0.25,
"velocity" : 127,
"mute" : 0,
"probability" : 1,
"velocity_deviation" : 0,
"release_velocity" : 0
}
{

,

"pitch" : 61,
"start_time" : 0.25,
"duration" : 0.25,
"velocity" : 127,
"mute" : 0,
"probability" : 1,
"velocity_deviation" : 0,
"release_velocity" : 0
}
],
}

886

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Because we are not transforming notes, we are going to take the output of live.miditool.in and use
it to create a bang . This bang will initiate the logic of the patch that is responsible for generating
the dict that represents the Clip. From here we can implement the generation logic, starting with
uzi. In this specific case, we will always generate 16 notes, so we'll set the first argument to 16, and
the second argument to 0, so that it counts up from 0 for the right outlet.

Now let's cobble together an array of note dictionaries using the uzi output. First we'll create a
dict.pack which will be crucial in forming the keys and values that represent each note. We only
need to generate three bits of information for each note: "pitch" , "start_time" and
"duration" . We can set the "pitch" to a fixed value of 60, the "start_time" to the output of

the uzi and the "duration" to a fixed value of 0.0625. The duration is always defined in beat time,
and so a 16th note is represented by this floating-point value.

887

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

As each of these note dictionaries are generated, they need to be appended to an array containing
all the notes. To do this we take the output of dict.pack and send it to an array prefixed by the
append symbol. Once the uzi has finished outputting we will use its middle outlet to output the

array of note dictionaries. Before sending that off to live.miditool.out we need to wrap it in a dict
with a "notes" key. This can be done with dict.pack and by making the first argument notes: .

888

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

You can now generate 16th notes by pressing the bang or apply button in Live. To vary the rhythm
that is generated each time, we can add a small randomisation to the chance that a note is
generated at all. We can do this by adding a random object to the patch and connecting it to the
probability key of each note dictionary. We will have to add the probability: argument to

dict.pack to do this.

Lastly, we can also add a dial to control the number of notes generated. We can do this by adding a
live.dial to the patch and connecting it to the uzi and live.miditool.in objects. As we did with the
Transformation example, we can also add the control to the presentation view and set the patcher
to "Open in presentation".

889

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Next Steps
Now that you have the basic building blocks for creating both a Generator and Transformation MIDI
Tool it's up to you to create more interesting, varied and explorative devices for yourself. Something
that you can explore next is using the context outlet of live.miditool.in to create MIDI Tools that are
more contextually aware of the Clip they are interacting with. You could also implement more
sophisticated algorithms for melodic and rhythmic generation, as well as musical and complex
transformations. Of course, you can also open the Euclidean and Velocity Shaper MIDI Tools in the
editor and look at those patches for inspiration as well.

Common Errors and How To Handle Them
My Generator or Transformation doesn't do anything
In this scenario, it's always good to start by checking that the live.miditool.in object is outputting
the data you expect. You can do this by attaching a dict.view object to the left outlet of
live.miditool.in and sending a bang to the object. If you see the data you expect, then the problem
is likely in the logic of your patch. If you see the correct data being emitted by live.miditool.in then
check that the transformed or generated data is arriving at the live.miditool.out object in the
correct format. Lastly, for a Transformation, ensure that there are notes in the MIDI Clip.

890

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Max for Live MIDI Tools

Remember, Transformations won't do anything if there are no notes available in the Clip to
transform.

Synchronisation
In some cases, you may see an error message in the status bar of Live like this:

This is because the patch has initiated a sort of transaction between Live and the MIDI Tool, but the
transaction has not been completed. This can happen for a number of reasons, but most likely
happens if you send a bang to live.miditool.in and do not also pass a dictionary back to Live via
live.miditool.out.

Limitations
MSP objects and audio processing
Objects that process audio do not work in MIDI Tools currently. MIDI Tools are not attached to the
audio processing engine and therefore cannot process audio.

node.script
Max for Live MIDI Tools do not support the node.script object in a straightforward way because this
object runs in its own process and can return values at an indeterminate time. Because MIDI Tools
depend on a synchronous interaction with Live, the node.script object is not suitable for use in a
MIDI Tool, unless the order of operations in a MIDI Tool is not contingent on the output of the
node.script object.

Transport
The transport object cannot be used to control the transport. It currently reports values, however,
these values are not necessarily correct and can be misleading.

891

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Presets

Presets
Storing a Preset

892

Presets for a Devices in the Library

892

Presets for a Devices Outside the Library

893

Saving a Max Device in the Library

893

Presets are a feature of Live that permit you to store the current state of a device. Since it is Live,
not Max, that does the saving, the state must be known to Live, which means a preset captures the
state of all the parameters you have defined. This means that the value of a number box not
connected to a parameter will not be saved -- Live presets are different from the Max preset object
in this way.

Storing a Preset
Click the Save Preset icon in the title bar of the Max device. (The Save Preset icon is the one
at the far right that resembles a floppy disk, for those of you who know what a floppy disk
looks like.)

In the File Browser, a new preset will be created and its name will be selected, ready for you
to edit. Type in a name for the preset.

Presets for a Devices in the Library
When you store a preset for a Max device in the Library, it appears beneath the device
hierarchically. In the example shown below, NicePreset is a preset that has been saved for the Max
device MyEffect.

892

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Presets

Presets for a Devices Outside the Library
When you store a preset for a Max device that is not located in the Library, the preset will have a
special preset-plus-device icon and also show the device name in square brackets before the preset
name. In the example below, we stored a preset called GiantPreset for an effect originally outside
the Library called MyGiantEffect.

Saving a Max Device in the Library
If you want to save a device into the Live library, it's better to use the Save As... command within
Max instead of moving the device file using your operating system. Using Save As... permits Live to
keep track of your device and manage its presets.

Insert the device you want to move. Click the edit button to launch Max to edit the device.
In Max, choose Save As... from the File menu. Navigate the standard save file dialog to show
the current Live Library folder. Save the device inside the Presets folder inside the Library
folder, or a subfolder of the Presets folder.
Return to Live and you will see the newly saved device. In the example below, we saved our
device as MyEffect.

893

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Preview Mode

Preview Mode
Enabling and Disabling Preview Mode

894

Uses of Preview Mode
Preview Mode Caveats

894
894

After opening a Live device in Max for editing, there are two copies of the device -- the one you are
editing and the one inserted into a track in Live. Preview Mode permits you to listen to the device
you are editing while Live runs in the background. The copy of the device inserted in the Live track
is disabled. Audio, MIDI, timing, and messages (including Live API commands) are sent between
Max and Live in order to make this happen. Preview Mode is always enabled when you begin to edit
a device in Max.

Enabling and Disabling Preview Mode
To toggle preview mode, click the preview icon. When preview mode is disabled, the icon in
the toolbar is gray.
You can also turn preview mode off by clicking the edit button in the Live device's title bar.
However, this also has the effect of closing the device in the editor.

Uses of Preview Mode
You can turn preview mode off as you are editing a device to compare the edited version of
a device with the original version.
You can turn preview mode off after saving a device to see how its user interface appears in
the Live device view.
Preview mode will increase the latency of a Live device slightly. Turn preview mode off to
hear the device with its original defined latency.

Preview Mode Caveats

894

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Preview Mode

The memory state of Max objects is not made consistent between devices as you enable
and disable preview mode. For instance, if you change a number box to 74 in a device in
Live and then edit the device, the number box will be set to zero when the edited version is
opened.
However, parameter state will be updated when toggling preview mode. If you set a live.dial
to 47 in Max, then disable preview mode, the dial will be updated to 47 in Live. If you then
set the dial to 61 in Live, then enable preview mode again, the dial will be updated to 61 in
Max.
Changes to parameter values in Max while in preview mode are undoable in Live.
Preview mode implements communicating between a send object in Live and a receive
object in Max (or vice versa), but the performance of the communication will be reduced
compared to the performance of send and receive within a single application.
The grab object cannot communicate with a receive object unless both objects are in the
same device, so you cannot use grab to communicate between devices in preview mode.
Some Max objects monopolize a resource on your computer. The udpreceive object, for
example, reserves a UDP port for itself so that no one else can access the port. This has the
potential to create problems when you have two udpreceive objects in two copies of the
same device. In this specific case, we have made the UDP objects release the port when
they are disabled as a result of a preview mode switch. However, other third-party objects
with similar resource-monopolizing issues may not work properly with preview mode.
Max objects that share data via symbolic names, such as table, coll, and buffer~, do not
share data across the boundary between Max and Live. For instance, if you have sample
data loaded into a buffer~ object named toto in Live, and you edit another device with a
buffer~ object named toto , the buffer~ object in the device in Max will not share data
with the object in Live.

895

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Resolving Conflicts in Frozen Devices

Resolving Conflicts in Frozen Devices
Overview of the Conflict Resolution and Unfreezing Process

896

Resolving Conflicts for a Frozen Device

897

The process of freezing adds copies of files in the Max search path to the device file. Consider the
example shown below. A Max device called MyEffect contains an abstraction called pumper.

If we freeze this device and save it, a copy of the pumper patcher file will be added to the device. If
we now open pumper, modify it, and save the changes, the frozen device is unaffected. However,
what happens if we decide we want to work on our MyEffect device some more? At this point,
there are two different versions of Pumper, the one in the device, and the one saved on disk. Which
one should we use?

Overview of the Conflict Resolution and Unfreezing Process

896

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Resolving Conflicts in Frozen Devices

Whenever you edit a frozen device, Max compares the files in the device with the versions on disk.
If it spots differences, it disables the unfreeze icon and unlock icons in the patcher toolbar and
enables the resolve conflicts icon, as shown below.

Before you can unfreeze a device with conflicts, you'll need to resolve them. Once you have
decided which file(s) you wish to work with, both the version you want to keep and the version you
want to discard will be written into a special folder located in your computer's Desktop folder called
Unfrozen Max Device Files. However, only the version you wish to keep will be in the search path.
The other version is put into a Discarded folder that is kept out of the search path.

Resolving Conflicts for a Frozen Device
Click the Resolve Conflicts icon in the patcher toolbar. The Resolve Conflicts window will
open.
Use the Action pop-up menu for each listed file with a conflict to choose which version you
wish to use.
Once all conflicts have been resolved, the icon in the patcher window toolbar will turn gray,
its caption will indicate No Conflicts, and the Unfreeze icon will become enabled.
Click the Unfreeze icon in the patcher window toolbar to unfreeze the device.

897

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / The Parameters Window

The Parameters Window
Displaying the Parameters Window

898

Locating a Parameter Object

901

Setting Parameter Object Values

902

The Parameters Window provides an overview of all the parameters currently associated with a Max
for Live device, whether they are built into the UI objects or defined via pattr objects.

Displaying the Parameters Window
Choose Parameters from the View menu when a device patcher window is the
frontmost window. The Parameters window will appear.

The # column displays the setting for the Order attribute, which can be used to set the
order in which parameters are recalled when a device is loaded. By default, all attributes are
recalled sequentially/at one time. By setting an attribute to have a lower order number, you
can recall parameter values in complex patches whose initial values may need to be
calculated based on initial or preset values so that the dependencies are preserved.

898

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / The Parameters Window

The L column displays the setting for the Link to Scripting Name attribute, which can
be used to link the Scripting Name used with the pattr family of objects and patcher
scripting to the Long Name and Short Name attributes. If the attribute names are linked,
the box is checked and the name of the parameter is shown in a different color text.

The Name column displays either the Scripting Name attribute or the Long Name
attribute, depending on whether or not they are linked. The Long Name attribute sets the
name that appears in Live's automation view.
The Short Name column displays either the Scripting Name attribute or the Short Name
attribute, depending on whether or not they are linked. The Short Name attribute sets the
name that appears as a part of the UI object's display.
The Type column displays the Type attribute used to set the type of data associated with
the object. The choices are:

Float: floating point number
Int: integer with a range of up to 256 values
Enum: enumerated list (used for objects such as multislider and umenu objects)
The Range column displays the Range/Enum attribute that sets either a
minimum/maximum or a list of possible values associated with the object's output.
The Mod Mode column displays the Clip Modulation Mode attribute that sets the type of
parameter modulation applied to the parameter. The clip modulation modes are described
here.
The Mod Range column displays the Clip Modulation Range attribute that sets the low
and high range values within which a parameter is modulated. Some clip modulation modes
use these parameter ranges for truncating modulation data.

899

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / The Parameters Window

The I column displays the Initial Enable attribute checkbox that enables or disables
setting an initial value as a part of a UI object's state.
The Initial Value column displays the initial value of the parameter if the Initial Enable
attribute is checked.
The Unit Style column displays the Unit Style attribute used when adding labels to UI
object displays. The unit style type for display can be set using the object's Inspector. The
choices are:

Int: integer
Float: floating point
Time: output values will have a ms (milliseconds) label. Larger values automatically
display seconds and milliseconds.
Hertz: output values are labeled in Hz (Hertz). Larger values automatically display in
kHz.
deciBel: output values are labeled in dB
%: output values are displayed as an integer percentage value
Pan: output values are labeled as Left/Right pan integer values based on the range
set for the object. When a range value between negative and positive integer values
(e.g. -100. 100.), negative values will be labeled as left or right channel settings
(-100L, 100R). If the range settings are have an upper range value of 0, the value will
be reported as value L . only Left channel values will be displayed. If the range
settings are have an lower range value of 0, the value will be reported as value R .
Semitones: displays values as negative/positive integer semitones for tuning displays
MIDI: displays integer values in the range 0 - 127 as MIDI note numbers (e.g. C#-2).
Custom: the label is user-definable, and is settable using the UI object inspector.
Native: displays the native unit style
The Exponent column displays the exponential value used when calculating the object's
output.
The Steps column displays the the precision of the object's output when clicking and
dragging. (The computer's keyboard can be used to enter any value.)
The Value column displays the current value.

900

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / The Parameters Window

Locating a Parameter Object
Click on the blue info icon in the left column for the parameter you want to
locate and choose Reveal in Patcher from the pop-up menu. The object
associated with the parameter will be highlighted.

901

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / The Parameters Window

Setting Parameter Object Values
Double-click in the Value column for a parameter setting to show a cursor and
text box. Type in a new value or symbol for the initialization value, followed by a
carriage return.

You can also adjust the user interface object manually, click on the blue info
icon in the left column for the parameter you want to set a value for and choose
Update Initial Value.
Click on the blue info icon in the left column for the parameter you want to set
a value for and choose Set to Initial Value from the pop-up menu. The UI object
will change to reflect the new initial value.

Choose Save from the File menu to save the new initialization settings.

902

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Unfreezing Devices

Unfreezing Devices
Rules for Unfreezing

903

Frozen devices cannot be edited. If you receive a frozen device from someone else that you'd like to
edit, or you want to edit one of your own frozen devices, you'll need to unfreeze it first. To
understand the unfreezing process, it helps to know what's in a frozen device.

The main device patcher file
Abstractions used by the device
Third-party Max external objects
Audio, image, and data files used by objects in the device
Files added as explicit dependencies of the device By contrast, an unfrozen device contains
only the main device patcher file. All the other files the device uses are expected to be
somewhere in the Max search path.
The unfreezing process ensures that all files in the frozen device (other than the main patcher) exist
in the search path. It is designed so that you will never lose data. If there are conflicts, you are
forced to resolve those conflicts before you can unfreeze.

Rules for Unfreezing
Here is a description of what Max does during the unfreezing process.

If a file exists in both the frozen device and the search path, and the file is identical (same
modification date and size), no action is taken. This is typically what happens if you create a
device, freeze it, and then unfreeze it.
If a file exists in the frozen device but does not exist in the search path, it is written to a
subfolder (named after the device) of the Unfrozen Max Device Files folder in the Desktop
folder. This might happen if you receive a frozen device from someone else and want to
unfreeze it in order to modify it.

903

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Unfreezing Devices

If a file exists in both the frozen device and the search path, but the file is different, then
Max will take one of two actions depending on how you have chosen to resolve the conflict.
An example file conflict is shown below.
If you choose Use Device Version, the version in the search path will be moved to a
Discarded Files subfolder of the device's subfolder of the Unfrozen Max Device Files folder.
Then the version of the file in the device will be written to the device's subfolder of the
Unfrozen Max Device Files folder.
If you choose Use Disk Version, the version in the frozen device will be written to a
Discarded Files subfolder of the device's subfolder of the Unfrozen Max Device Files folder.
The version in the search path will be left untouched.

Discarded Files folders are not in the search path. However, subfolders created when
unfreezing devices are in the search path. When Max starts up, it looks for the
Unfrozen Max Devices Folder, then adds any folders only one level below to the search
path. This is different from the way the search path is typically constructed by
recursively adding all subfolders of folders you have specified.

904

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Using {pattr} in Live Devices

Using pattr in Live Devices
Enabling Parameter Mode

905

autopattr Considerations

906

Differences Between Max and Max for Live

906

Live-specific user interface objects such as live.dial save their state within Live documents and
presets. If you want to use standard Max objects and have them interact with Live, you will have to
enable the Parameter Mode Enable attribute in the pattr object. This ensures that the data internal
to pattr is also stored (and recalled) using Live's document.

Enabling Parameter Mode
Select a pattr object and click the Inspector button in the Patcher toolbar to show the
object's
Click the Parameter tab at the top of the inspector window to show the Parameter
attributes.
Check the Parameter Mode Enable checkbox.

905

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Using {pattr} in Live Devices

autopattr Considerations
The autopattr object provides an easy to way manage the state of standard Max objects, but it will
not work with the parameter system, so objects that are attached to an autopattr will not be seen
by Live. If you want a pattr parameter to appear for modulation etc, you will need to add a pattr
object for each instance.

Differences Between Max and Max for Live
Although the pattr objects can be used in the context of Max for Live, there are some differences
when compared to Max. You can read more about various limitations here. To better understand
pattr we encourage you to visit the pattr guide.

906

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Using Symbols in Max for Live

Using Symbols in Max for Live
Defining a unique symbol name

907

The "name space" in Max is global - when you have objects that have names associated with them
such as coll, send, receive, table, or buffer~, you can share data between Max for Live devices. In
these cases, the Max name space is shared, but the "signal processing space" is independent - each
Max for Live device processes its audio or data separately.

Defining a unique symbol name
If you want a named object to be unique to a device, use three dashes (---) to start the name of your
buffer~ or send / receive destination (e.g. s ---filtercutoff ).

When your patch is initialized, it will replace the three dashes with a unique-to-Live number (e.g.
s 024filtercutoff );

907

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Working With Files in Max for Live

Working With Files in Max for Live
Setting Live's Preset and Export File Copying Behavior

909

Historically, Max developers have used the search path for convenient access to files by name, but
this is not sufficient for managing files in Live presets or documents.

The live.drop object was designed to be added to Max devices that work with files. When you drag
an audio file from either the Live file browser or your operating system's file manager, live.drop will
output the complete file path as a single symbol. You can then pass this symbol to a buffer~ or
sfplay~ object, as shown in the example below.

The live.drop object also stores the name and location of the most recently dropped file in a way
that Live understands. By default, live.drop has its Parameter Mode Enable set to true, so any files
dropped onto it will be saved in the current Live document. When the document is re-opened, the
name will be sent out live.drop 's outlet. When saving a preset for a device containing a live.drop,
Live will copy any referenced audio files to the Live library if they are not already there. When a
user opens the preset, the file's path in the Library, not the file's original path, will be sent out
live.drop's outlet.

If you perform a Collect All and Save on your Live Set, any audio files referenced by live.drop
objects with Parameter Mode Enable set to true will be copied into a newly created folder. This
permits Live users to move documents containing Max devices written with live.drop to different
computers without losing the audio files the devices were using.

908

User Guide / Max for Live Extended / Working With Files in Max for Live

A Live user can, however, choose to turn off the program's default file-copying behavior.

Setting Live's Preset and Export File Copying Behavior
Open the Live Preferences window.
Click the File Folder tab.
At the bottom of the File Folder preference pane, you will see an item called Collect Files on
Export. Always is the default behavior. You can also choose Never, in which case files are
never copied, or Ask, where you will be given the opportunity to decide whether files should
be copied in each case that arises.

909

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended

Appendix A: MC Extended

910

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Gen Features for MC

Gen Features for MC
Create Simple Gen Patchers with @expr

911

Control gen Execution with the @hot Attribute

911

New features have been added to Gen to support MC as well as to make integration of Gen easier
with the remainder of your Max patching. The changes include:

Create Simple Gen Patchers with @expr
You can use the @expr typed-in attribute with a gen, gen~, mc.gen~ or mcs.gen~ object to specify
a single line of Genexpr code.

Control gen Execution with the @hot Attribute
By default, gen triggers processing only when receiving a value in its left inlet. The @hot attribute
will set any other inlet to be "hot" and trigger processing.

911

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Gen Features for MC

912

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances

Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances
Generating Random Values

913

Generating a Range of Values

915

Generating an Exponential Series

916

Generating a Harmonic Series

916

Your Own Generating Algorithm

917

The MC Wrapper lets you treat all the objects within it as a "space" that can be changed globally
with a single message. Here are some approaches using built-in wrapper functions. You can also
generate your own control schemes using the lower-level @applyvalues message.

Generating Random Values
To generate a random space of values for all wrapper instances, use the deviate message. The
first argument to the message is the "width" of the deviation. The second argument is the center
value. Here is an example of changing the frequency of all oscillators in an mc.cycle~ object. As the
slider value is increased, the range of values ("width") increases. When the slider is set to 0, values
generated will be 440 because the width is 0.

913

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances

Optionally, you can specify an attribute or message that will be used instead of a float or int. Here is
deviate applied to the @cutoff attribute of the lores~ object. It may help to think of the syntax
of wrapper generation messages as follows: the first argument is the operating parameter (how, for
example, deviate will do its job), and everything that follows is the message that it will use to
change the value of an instance.

914

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances

Generating a Range of Values
To set instances within the wrapper to a range of values, use the spread message. This message
follows the same syntactical pattern as the deviate message. The first argument is the beginning
of the range to generate, and the second argument is the end of the range. If the end is above the
beginning, the first wrapper will receive the lowest value. If it's negative, the first instance will
receive the highest value. The spread message has three variants that specify how the range is
calculated. spreadinclusive includes both the first and second values in the range.
spreadexclusive exclusives both the first and second values from the range. And
spreadincludesecond includes the second value but not the first. By convention spread is the

same as spreadincludfirst ; it includes the first value but not the second value. The following
examples show the differences in these variations:

915

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances

Generating an Exponential Series
To generate an exponentially increasing or decreating series of values applied to all instances in the
wrapper, use the exponential or scaledexponential messages. The first argument is the value
of the exponent in the series and the second argument is the base that is raised to the exponent.
Negative exponents cause values to increase over the series while positive exponents cause values
to approach zero. The scaledexponential variant divides values in the series by the number of
instances in the wrapper, resulting in an overall range that is independent of the number of
instances.

Generating a Harmonic Series
To generate a harmonic series of values applied to all instances in the wrapper, use the harmonic
and subharmonic messages. Each message assigns the first instance in the wrapper to the first
harmonic (or subharmonic), which is given by the second argument (the fundamental frequency) and
subsequent harmonics or subharmonics to successive wrapper instances.

The first argument is a multiplier on the harmonic calculations, typically this is set to 1 for a
harmonic series. As an example, here are the first harmonics and subharmonics for 500:

916

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Generating Values for All MC Wrapper Instances

Your Own Generating Algorithm
In addition to the built-in MC Wrapper messages, you can define your own algorithms to control a
space of channels:

Javascript can produce an list of values to be used with the applyvalues message
the mc.gen object can calculate distinct per-channel values with the mc_channel operator
the mc.generate~ object can generate and update values for objects in the MC Wrapper at
signal rate

917

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC and Max for Live

MC and Max for Live
Max for Live devices receive audio input via plugin~ and send audio to Live via plugout~. The
mc.plugin~ and mc.plugout~ versions of these objects accept multi-channel inputs and outputs to
be routed to and from Max for Live.

Devices created with multi-channel inputs and outputs will support multichannel routing within
Live, as well as having the appropriate number of inlets and outlets when loaded into Max within
the amxd~ object. The current maximum channel count is 64.

918

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Channel Topology

MC Channel Topology
Multichannel patch cords are useful as a way to organize audio signals. MC includes several objects
that you can use to change how signals are organized.

For example, if you are using mc.vst~ with a stereo synth plug-in that has 10 instances, that object
will have two multichannel outputs with 10 channels each. The multichannel patch cord on the left
has the "left" outputs for all 10 synths and the multichannel patch cord on the right has the "right"
outputs for all 10 synths.

If want to mix all the synths to stereo, you will need to produce a two-channel signal routed to
mc.dac~. To mix the signals as expected, use mc.interleave~ to produce a 20-channel signal that
alternates the left and right channels.

919

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Channel Topology

You can feed this 20-channel signal to mc.stereo~, which (by default) will add the odd-numbered
channels (1, 3, 5...) to its first (or "left" output) and even-numbered channels (2, 4, 6...) to its second
(or "right" output). The resulting signal can be connected directly to mc.dac~.

Use mc.deinterleave~ to transform an interleaved signal back to two non-interleaved signals. This is
useful for separating signals for the inputs to mc.vst~, mc.poly~, or mc.gen~.

920

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Channel Topology

The mc.transpose~ object provides a more general way to reorganize multichannel signals. If you
have four instances of groove~ in an mc.groove~ object playing back stereo samples, it provides you
with two four-channel patch cords separating left and right channels. It may be more useful to have
four two-channel patch cords, each of which has the left and right channels for the four instances.
This can be accomplished with mc.transpose~:

Now you can add individual effects on a per-MC-instance basis, using mcs.vst~ as shown here:

921

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Channel Topology

922

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

MC Dynamic Routing
Sending Multi-Channel Audio Between Patchers

923

Dynamic Routing Using mc.send~ and mc.receive~

923

Dynamic Multi-Channel Routing Using Max Messages

924

There are two basic methods of dynamic routing for multi-channel signals:

Use mc.send~ and mc.receive~ to send multiple channels of audio between patchers
Use mc.matrix~, mcs.matrix~, mc.selector~, and mc.gate~ to control routing of multichannel
signals using Max messages

Sending Multi-Channel Audio Between Patchers
mc.send~ and mc.receive~ are multi-channel versions of send~ and receive~. An important
limitation when using these multichannel versions is that you must expicitly define the number of
channels you will be communicating between the objects via a typed-in argument that follows the
receive name. The mc.receive~ cannot change its number of channels dynamically.

Any mc.send~ objects with a matching name can send up to the defined number of channels in the
mc.receive~. Extra channels in a multi-channel signal connected to mc.send~ are ignored. If you
supply too few channels to mc.send~, mc.receive~ will output these channels as zero signals. In
other words, mc.receive~always produces a multi-channel signal with a set number of channels
regardless of what you send it via mc.send~.

Dynamic Routing Using mc.send~ and mc.receive~

923

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

Like send~ and receive~, the mc.send~ and mc.receive~ objects accept the set message to change
the source or destination name they use to communicate. However, the fixed channel limitation of
mc.receive~ is tied to the object instance, not the symbol used for the destination name. Here is an
example using the set message to mc.receive~. To start, the mc.receive~ uses the name foo and
is communicating with the four-channel mc.send~ with name foo .

If we send set bar to the mc.receive~, the output is still four channels despite the fact that
mc.send~ with name bar is only sending two channels.

Dynamic Multi-Channel Routing Using Max Messages
The mc.gate~ and mc.selector~ use the MC Wrapper and work similarly to their single-channel
counterparts. The number or signal at the left inlet switches all channels of the multi-channel signal
in the other inlets (mc.selector~) or outlets (mc.gate~).

924

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

The behavior of the two multichannel variants of the matrix~ warrants a more detailed explanation.
The mc.matrix~ consists of multiple matrix~ objects in the MC Wrapper. However, because each
matrix~ can be individually targeted, channels within a multichannel input can be routed to
different multichannel outputs. In this example, there is an mc.matrix~ with one multichannel input
and two multichannel outputs. By sending the message 0 0 1 (which goes to all matrix~ instances
in the wrapper), we assign the inputs to the left outlet. The right outlet produces a multi-channel
signal with zero in all channels.

925

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

Using the wrapper's setvalue message to mc.matrix~, we can assign only the third channel of the
input multi-channel signal to the right outlet using the message setvalue 3 0 1 1 .

926

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

The matrix~ object numbers its channels starting at 0 whereas mc.target and the MC Wrapper
setvalue message start channel numbering at 1. The special wrapper setvalue target of 0

before a message will address all instances inside a wrapped object, which is the same thing as
sending the message without using setvalue .

The mcs.matrix~ object is a single matrix~ object where all the signal inputs are combined into one
multichannel input and all the signal outputs are combined into one multichannel output. To
duplicate the above example with mc.matrix~ in mcs.matrix~, first observe that there are four total
inputs and eight total outputs, despite the arguments 1 2 to mc.matrix~. To match this, we need
an mcs.matrix~ with arguments 4 8 :

Since mcs.matrix~ provides only one multichannel output, we need to use an mc.separate to split its
eight-channel multichannel signal into two four-channel multichannel signals. To route the third
channel of the input in the same way, we send the message 2 6 1 (remember matrix~ channels
are zero-relative):

927

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

Generally, you'll prefer mc.matrix when you want to route multichannel signals as a whole to
different patch cords. This can be achived in one message with the mc.matrix example:

By contrast, mcs.matrix~ is an effective way to manipulate channels within a multichannel signal.
For example, sending the messages
0 7 1, 1 6 1, 2 5 1, 3 4 1, 4 3 1, 5 2 1, 6 1 1, 7 0 1 in this mcs.matrix~ reverses the

order of the eight input channels.

928

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Dynamic Routing

929

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Event Objects

MC Event Objects
See Also

930

multirange - Two-dimensional function editor used to create definitions for mc.evolve~ and
mc.gradient~
mc.gen - Host multiple Gen patches for event processing
mc.target - Format messages for individual voice targets
mc.targetlist - Format messages for all defined voice targets
mc.line - Produce multiple linear ramps with a voice identifier
mc.cell - Format jit.cellblock selections into targeted event messages
mc.makelist - Create lists using a target voice index
mc.route - Route messages based on a target voice index
mc.function - A version of the function object containing multiple functions
mc.input - A version of the mc.target object with multiple inlets

See Also
Processing Events from MC Signals

930

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Function Generators

Multichannel Function Generators
The mc.evolve~ Object

931

The mc.gradient~ Object

932

Creating Complexity With Multichannel Function Generators

934

Two MC objects, mc.evolve~ and mc.gradient~, generate repeating multi-channel control functions.
The unique feature of these objects is that they allow you to specify function values as ranges; the
objects uses these ranges to spread sample values within the range across the space of the output
audio channels. The multi-channel control signals generated by these objects can be applied to
oscillator or filter frequencies, audio levels, or pan positions.

By connecting the multirange user interface object, you can draw input functions for either
mc.evolve~ or mc.gradient~ as they accept the same input format.

The mc.evolve~ Object
The mc.evolve~ object maps an input driving function from 0 to 1 over a series of ranges in a stored
function. The value of the driving function represents an X position where 0 is the beginning and 1
is the end. Each output channel, starting at 1, fills out a range of Y values. As an example, sending
two lists 0 0.5 1 and 1 0.5 1 establishes two ranges, one at X position 0 and one at X position 1. If
there are three output channels, then the output, regardless of the "X" value of the input driving
function, would be a constant multichannel signal containing 0.5, 0.75, and 1.

931

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Function Generators

More interesting time-varying behavior begins when ranges specified at each X position are
different. In this example all values at X position 0 are 0.5 because both the low and high range
values are 0.5. But at X position 1, the range is from 0 to 1. If you drive mc.evolve~ with a phasor~,
the effect of this range specification a diverging series of values that snap back to the middle as the
phase resets.

We've used the multirange object to draw this range. Connect the third (dump) outlet of multirange
to the left inlet of mc.evolve~. As you draw new functions, mc.evolve~ will update.

The mc.gradient~ Object
The mc.gradient~ object, like mc.evolve~, generates complex multichannel functions based on a
stored set of ranges and an input driving signal.

The mc.gradient~ object divides the X axis of a function into a number of evenly spaced "slices." The
number and locations of the slices are determined by the object's @chans attribute. Each slice
intersects a function of ranges. A channel's output value is determined by an input signal between 0
and 1 specifying a distance between the low and high range values at a given slice position. In the
diagram below, mc.gradient~ is using five channels whose slices are located at X positions 0, 0.25,

932

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Function Generators

0.5, 0.75 and 1. The output for channels 1 and 5 will always be zero, because there is no range at
those X positions. However, at slice position 0.5 (channel 3), there is a range between 0.5 and 1.0.
When the input signal is 0, channel 3's output will be 0.5, the low end of the range. When the input
signal is 0.5, channel 3's output will be 0.75, the midpoint of the range. And then the input signal is
1.0, channel 3's output will be 1.0, the high end of the range.

input 0.5, output 0.75
1.0

1.0

0.0

0.5

1.0

1.0

0.0

0.0

0.0
Ch 1

Ch 2

Ch 3

Ch 4

Ch 5

By default, mc.gradient~ has a function consisting of two points, one at X position 0 and one at X
position 1. Both points have Y minimum and maximum values of 0. This means mc.gradient~ will
output 0 for all channels given any input signal value. To create the function that corresponds to the
above diagram, send mc.gradient~ the message 0.5 0.5 1.0 ; this means: at X position 0.5, define
a range between 0.5 and 1.0. Note that the X position need not correspond with a slice location;
this is being done here to create more straightforward illustration of the object's behavior.

In this example, we apply the multichannel output signal produced by mc.gradient~ to the levels of
five sawtooth oscillators. The mc.gradient~ object is driven by a phasor~ at 1 Hz.

933

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Function Generators

The meter~ in the example shows that the level of channels 1 and 5 is always zero, while channel 3
has the highest level.

For a smoothly oscillating function output from mc.gradient~, map a cycle~ object to 0 - 1 using a
scale~ as shown in this example:

Creating Complexity With Multichannel Function Generators

934

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Function Generators

Both mc.evolve~ and mc.gradient~ are capable of generating complex evolving multichannel control
functions. Here are a few ways to achieve complexity beyond the examples shown here:

Supply a multichannel signal to the input of mc.gradient~ - each input channel will drive its
corresponding output channel indepdently.
Each function point supplied to mc.gradient~ can have a fourth "phase" value that defines
where the zero input value will start; this allows ranges to move in opposite directions as
you move across the space of channel slices. By default the phase starts at the lowest point
in the range.
Use a more complex non-periodic input function such as one generated by a line~ object.

935

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Gen Instances

MC Gen Instances
Using One Gen DSP File

936

Using Multiple Gen DSP Files

937

When you create an mc.gen~ object, you are creating a hosting environment for multiple instances
of a Gen DSP patch. There are several ways to manage the contents of the object, based on how the
Gen DSP is loaded.

If you create an mc.gen~ object without a patcher name argument, you are working with the
default, unnamed Gen DSP patch maintained by Gen. This patch is duplicated across all instances,
and any changes to this patch will be propagated across all voices.

Using One Gen DSP File

936

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Gen Instances

When you load a single Gen DSP file into an mc.gen~ object, it is copied to all voices. If the patch is
changed, the changes are immediately propogated to all voices as you edit.

Using Multiple Gen DSP Files
You can load each gen~ instance inside mc.gen~ with a different Gen DSP file. This is done using
the @values wrapper message as a typed-in attribute. If fewer files are provided than channels are
defined, the remaining channels will use the default Gen DSP patch.

In this case, if you make a change to one of the patches, it will not propogate any changes to the
other voices - each of the Gen DSP files is isolated from the others.

937

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Gen Operators

MC Gen Operators
Two Gen operators are useful with mc.gen~ and mc.gen:

mc_channel reports the current channel of the Gen patcher within mc.gen~ or mc.gen
(starting at 1).
mc_channelcount reports the total number of channels (Gen instances) within mc.gen~ or
mc.gen.

These Gen operators make it possible to do voice-specific calculations. You can also connect them
to the Gen out operator to provide voice-specific identification signals or events outside the Gen
context.

When used in a patcher inside gen~, mcs.gen~, or gen (in other words, outside the context of the
MC Wrapper), both operators output 1.

938

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Managed Polyphony

MC Managed Polyphony
The Basis for Polyphony
MC Polyphony using MIDI Notes

939
940

MC Polyphony using Max Messages

941

Managing DSP Resources

942

Enabling the Busy Map

943

Using Named Busy Maps

943

The MC Wrapper can manage polyphony without the use of the poly~ object. You can assign Max
messages or MIDI events to specific MC channels and turn off processing for unused channels.

The Basis for Polyphony
Using the poly~ object, a polyphonic synth has a defined voice count. poly~ will load a separate
patcher for each voice, which generates or processes sound independently from the other patchers.
By contrast, with MC-based polyphony, there is a single patcher with MC wrapper objects set to a
number of channels equal to the total voice count. For example, in this simple example, the
mc.cycle~, mc.*~, and mc.gain~ objects have 12 channels. If you could control these objects
independently, you could hear 12 independent voices.

939

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Managed Polyphony

A good polyphony management system has three main benefits:

1. To the maximum extent possible given the fixed resources allocated to your synth, new
notes will not cut off already-playing notes.
2. Voices allocated are spready cyclically to all channels, permitting pleasing panning or mixing
effects based on channel number. For example you could spread channels across a stereo
space knowing that on average, notes played will tend to fill the space.
3. A polyphony management system can help keep track of which voices are actually playing
and manage DSP resources by shutting off process for voices not producing sound.
As with the Max poly~ object, the MC polyphony system provides all three benefits. DSP resource
management is more involved with MC polyphony than with poly~; we'll cover that in the final
section below.

MC Polyphony using MIDI Notes
The mc.noteallocator~ object accepts MIDI messages and directs messages to a specific target
voice based on its internal voice allocation mechanism. Voices can be allocated either on the basis
of MIDI note-on and note-off messages, or, more typically, by connecting a multichannel audio
signal to the left inlet of mc.noteallocator~. In that case, when a note-off for an allocated voice has
been received and the corresponding audio signal in the multichannel input goes to zero,
mc.noteallocator~ marks that channel as available to be allocated when future MIDI note-on
messages are received.

940

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Managed Polyphony

To specify a maximum number of voice numbers for allocation, supply a value for the @voices
attribute. By default the @voices attribute has a value of zero, which means that if a multichannel
audio signal is connected to the left inlet of mc.noteallocator~, it will use the number of channels in
the incoming audio signal. If no audio signal is connected, mc.noteallocator~ will use a default of 15
voices (mc.voiceallocator~ works similarly but defaults to 16 voices).

MC Polyphony using Max Messages
If you prefer to allocate and control MC channels using Max messages instead of MIDI notes, you
can use the more general mc.voiceallocator~ object. Here is an example driven by a metro object
that allocates and releases voices using mc.voiceallocator~.

941

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Managed Polyphony

The mc.voiceallocator~ object accepts the endevent and release messages to free an allocated
voice, so if you want to write your own audio analysis algorithm to detect when a "note" has
finished playing, that algorithm could trigger these messages.

Managing DSP Resources
MC polyphony manages DSP resources by turning off channels of processing within each object
using the MC wrapper. To enable/disable this behavior you need to use the @usebusymap attribute
for each MC object.

A busy map is maintained by mc.noteallocator~ and mc.voiceallocator~ to keep track of which
voices are currently defined to be playing ("busy"). These objects use the map to decide which MC
channels are available for use; effectively implementing the first benefit of polyphony management
mentioned above (new notes don't cut off playing notes).

Keep in mind that an object such as mc.cycle~ in the MC Wrapper consists of a set of MSP cycle~
objects. When you use the busy map, wrapper-based objects will turn off processing in individual
cycle~ objects within an mc.cycle~. If fewer than the maximum number of voices are playing, this
can save CPU resources.

942

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Managed Polyphony

MC objects not based on the MC Wrapper do not implement busy maps because they have no way
of turning off processing for individual channels.

Enabling the Busy Map
To enable the use of the busy map for any wrapper-based object:

For all wrapper-based objects whose DSP resources you want to control, set the
@usebusymap attribute to 1. For brevity the name @bz can also be used.

Here is the mc.noteallocator~ example above where all wrapper-based objects have @bz 1
included.

The @usebusymap attribute uses a patcher-global busy map. If you want to control wrapper-based
objects in several patchers, or you have more than one mc.noteallocator~ or mc.voiceallocator~ in
the same patcher, you can use named busy maps described in the next section.

Using Named Busy Maps

943

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Managed Polyphony

The mc.noteallocator~ and mc.voiceallocator~ objects include a @name attribute that specifies a
symbolic name to associate with their internal busy map.

To control DSP resources of a wrapper-based object using a named busy map:

Create an mc.noteallocator~ or mc.voiceallocator~ object with a @name attribute
Add the busymapname ( bzname for short) attribute to each wrapper object you want to
control
Here is the mc.noteallocator~ example above using named busy maps:

944

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

MC Mixing and Panning
Mixing Multichannel Signals

945

Panning Modes

947

Auto-Adding Multichannel Signals

951

User Interface Objects for Multichannel Mixing

952

Mixing Multichannel Signals
The primary tool for mixing multichannel audio signals is the mc.mixdown~ object. This object
mixes inputs in a multi-channel signal connected to its left inlet to an output multi=channel signal,
optionally panning the inputs across the space of the outputs.

Static Pan Positions
There are two ways to specify a series of unchanging pan positions for inputs to mc.mixdown~. The
most efficient way is by supplying a list of pan values to the @pans attribute, which can be a typedin argument. Alternatively, you can use mc.list] or {mc.range to generate a multi-channel signal
containing the pan values, then connect that multi-channel signal to the right inlet of mc.mixdown~.

945

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

Dynamic Panning
For dynamic panning, you can use any multi-channel signal for the pan input of the mc.mixdown~
object. For example, we can use an mc.sig~ object with the deviate message to create a set of
random values for channel panning.

946

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

Using oscillators for the panning position allows you to create evolving results with only a few
objects.

Panning Modes
There are four panning modes available when using the mc.mixdown~ object: Mode 0 (Circular
Panning), Mode 1 (Line Panning, ranged 0-1), Mode 2 (Line Panning, ranged 1-N) and Mode 3
(Circular Panning, ranged 0-N). Each uses a different method of determining where the outputs are
located in relation to the number range available for panning.

Mode 0: Normalized Circular Panning (0-1)
The pan position is a value between 0.0 and 1.0, and represents an even-power pan within a circular
configuration of channels spread evenly across that range. For example, a two channel
configuration has the two outputs at pan position 0.25 and 0.75.

Why not 0.0 and 1.0? Because 0.5 should represent a value evenly placed between the two
channels, and 0.0 should also be halfway between the two channels - as if they were in a circle.

947

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

As you can see from the following diagram, if there are three outputs, they will be located at .167,
.5 and .833.

0.5
B
0.625

0.375

0.25

0.75
A

C

0.125

0.875

0.0

Likewise, if there are four outputs, they will be located at 0.125, 0.375, 0.625 and 0.875.

948

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

0.5
B
0.375

0.25

0.625

A

C

0.75

0.875

0.125
D
0.0

To determine the pan position of any single channel in a mc.mixdown~ scenario, divide 1.0 by the
number of channels times 2, then use the odd-numbered values produced. For example, if you have
5 output channels, the pan positions for the outputs will be:

Calculate 1.0 / (5 channels * 2) = 0.1
The five output channels are 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9

Mode 1: Normalized Line Panning (0-1)
In this mode, the pan position is a value between 0.0 and 1.0, and represents an even-power pan
across a linear configuration of channels spread evenly across that range, but with the first and last
locations at positions 0.0 and 1.0.

This mode can be somewhat more easily understood, but the values are also clamped to the range
of 0.0 to 1.0. If we have three outputs, their locations are at 0.0, 0.5 and 1.0:

949

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

A
0.0

B
0.125

0.25

0.375

0.5

C
0.75

0.625

0.875

1.0

A four-output configuration would have the output locations at 0.0, 0.33, 0.66 and 1.0:

A
0.0

B
0.125

0.25

C
0.375

0.5

0.625

D
0.75

0.875

1.0

Mode 2: Channel-Based Line Panning (1-N)
Panning mode 2 is similar to mode 1, in that the values are placed on across a linear path with the
values at the extreme ends. However, in this mode, each output is placed at its integer value, with
the lowest output at 1.0, and the highest output located at its value. For example, a three-output
configuration would have outputs at 1.0, 2.0 and 3.0:

A
1.0

B
1.25

1.5

1.75

2.0

C
2.25

2.5

2.75

3.0

And a four-output object would have output locations at 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0:

A
1.0

B
1.5

2.0

C
2.5

3.0

D
3.5

4.0

Like mode 1, the values are clamped at the top and the bottom of the range, so values under 1.0, or
over the integer value of the highest output, will not produce expected results.

Mode 3: Channel-Based Circular Panning (0-N)

950

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

Mode 3 is similar to mode 0, in that the panning exists in a circular layout. But like mode 2, the
outputs are located at their integer value locations. A four-channel configuration would have the
outputs as follows:

2.0
B
1.5

1.0

2.5

A

C

3.0

3.5

0.5
D
0.0
4.0

Note that location 0.0 is the same as the location of the last output, and the first output occupies
location 1.0. This allows you to 'rotate' a sound around the outputs, but makes direct access to each
output easier to manage.

Auto-Adding Multichannel Signals
As with standard signal patchcords, combining two multichannel patchcords at an object inlet will
mix the contents of prior to processing. When the two patchcords contain the same number of
channels, the channels will be mixed together individually.

951

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

If one multichannel patchcord contains more channels than the other, the result will be the largest
channel count of either of the patchcords.

In many cases, you can also mix multichannel and standard audio signals, with the standard signal
treated as the equivalent of a 1-channel MC signal.

User Interface Objects for Multichannel Mixing
To set all levels of a multichannel signal, use the mc.gain~ object. By default, mc.gain~ auto-adapts
to the number of channels in its input and produces the same number of channels, with the
incoming signals scaled by the value of the gain slider.

952

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

To set levels of a multichannel signal individually, use the mc.live.gain~ or mc.multigain~ objects.
mc.live.gain~ is a version of live.gain~ with a single multi-channel input and a single multi-channel
output. Like mc.gain~ it auto-adapts to its input channel count by default. If the @channels
attribute mc.live.gain~ is set to a non-zero value it outputs a fixed number of channels regardless of
the input channel count.

The mc.multigain~ object is a version of mc.gain~ offering individual sliders for each input channel.

953

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Mixing and Panning

The mc.multigain~ object provides a way to set all sliders with modifier key gestures.

To set a slider individually, click in the slider and drag to increase or decrease the level. You
will not be able to change a different slider until you end the drag.
To draw across all sliders setting them to the position of the cursor, hold down the option
while dragging.
To change the level of all sliders proportionally, hold down the shift key while dragging one
slider.

954

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Patchcords

MC Patch Cords
Auto-Adding Multi-Channel Signals

955

MC patch cords carry multiple channels of audio simultaneously. This makes it easier to work with
audio spatialization, complex synthesis voicings and explicitly polyphonic signals.

A patch cord will be multi-channel if it is connected to a multi-channel outlet of an MC object.

These patch cords have a distinctive appearance: they are blue and black (as opposed yellow and
black single-channel patch cords). MC patch cords are also slightly thicker. You can quickly see how
many channels are being used by hovering over the patch cord when the patcher is unlocked.

Auto-Adding Multi-Channel Signals
With single-channel patch cords, connecting two signals into a single object inlet will add the two
signals before they are received by the object.

With multi-channel patch cords, this auto-adding also occurs, but it is more complex when the
incoming multi-channel patchcords contain different numbers of channels.

When multi-channel signal patchcords are connected to a single inlet, the resulting signal will
contain the number of channels from the patch cord with the greatest number of signals.

955

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Patchcords

956

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Polyphony

MC Polyphony
Topics

957

Objects

957

Examples

957

Topics
You can learn more about implementing polyphony with MC by reviewing the following:

Polyphony Using mc.poly~

Polyphony With Multiple Patchers

MC Managed Polyphony

Objects
MC objects that are particularly useful for polyphony include:

mc.target
mc.targetlist
mc.noteallocator~
mc.voiceallocator~

Examples
mc.poly~ Outputs - An example of some of the MC features of poly~

957

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Polyphony

MC Voice Numbers - An example targeting and receiving information from individual voices
MC Polyphony Busymap - A example of the use of the busy map for voice allocation

958

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Recording and Playback

MC Recording and Playback
Buffer Playback with mc.* Objects

959

Buffer Playback with mcs.* Objects

959

Recording

960

Buffer Playback with mc.* Objects
The mc.* versions of the objects create multiple parallel versions of the audio playback objects. By
changing parameters to each of the devices, you can create complex results with relatively little
patching. For example, you can use mc.groove~ modified by the deviate wrapper message to
create a swarming effect.

Buffer Playback with mcs.* Objects
Using the mcs.* objects for buffer playback makes it easier to integrate audio streams with other
MC objects. The mcs.* objects implement multichannel inlets and outlets that can be further
manipulated with MC objects or routed to multi-speaker audio systems.

959

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Recording and Playback

For example, we can use the multichannel output of the mcs.groove~ object as source material for a
dual-channel fade-in patch. Since the multichannel audio is directly manipulated by the mc.*~
object, a multichannel signal will control the output levels of our file player.

Recording
Use the mc.sfrecord~ object to record a multi-channel signal directly to disk.

You can also record into a multichannel buffer~ object using the mc.record~ object.

960

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Signal Manipulation Objects

MC Signal Manipulation Objects
Creating Multi-Channel Signals

961

Separating Multi-Channel Signals into Single Channels

962

Combining and Separating Multi-Channel Signals

962

Adding and Removing Channels

963

Transforming Signals

964

MC includes a number of objects that are useful for combining, separating, and transforming
multichannel signals. These objects do not use the MC Wrapper but are useful in conjunction with
wrapper-based objects.

Creating Multi-Channel Signals
mc.pack~ accepts numbers, single-channel signals, or multichannel signals and produces a
multichannel signal with a designated number of outputs. This can be used to group separate
single-channel sources into a single multichannel patch cord.

If you want to create a multichannel signal from numbers, you can also use the wrapper-based
object mc.sig~ or the even simpler mc.list~.

961

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Signal Manipulation Objects

Separating Multi-Channel Signals into Single Channels
To separate a multichannel signal into one or more individual signal outputs, use mc.unpack~. The
argument to mc.unpack~ determines the number of individual signal outlets.

If the multi-channel input to mc.unpack~ contains fewer channels than the number of outlets, the
extra outlets will produce a zero signal. If the multichannel input contains more channels than the
number of outlets, the additional input channels are ignored.

Combining and Separating Multi-Channel Signals
If you have several multi-channel signals you would like to group into a single multichannel signal,
use the mc.combine~ object. mc.combine~ produces an output multichannel signal containing the
total number of input channels in the inputs. The argument to mc.combine~ specifies the number of
inputs.

To separate a multichannel signal into two or more multichannel signals, use mc.separate~.
Arguments to mc.separate~ specify the channel counts in its output signals.

962

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Signal Manipulation Objects

Adding and Removing Channels
To make a multi-channel signal that copies a single-channel input, use mc.dup~. The argument
specifies the number of copies produced.

To force a multichannel output to have a set number of channels, use mc.separate~ with one
argument specifying that number of channels. Additional channels are split off to the right outlet,
but you don't need to connect that outlet to anything. If there are fewer channels in the input than
you specify in the argument, the output will be padded with zero signals.

963

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Signal Manipulation Objects

To mix all channels of a multichannel signal to fewer channels, use mc.mixdown~. mc.stereo~ is a
stereo-specific version of the mc.mixdown~ object. A single mixed channel can be obtained by
using mc.op~ with the @op attribute set to sum .

Transforming Signals
MC includes several objects that you can use to change how channels within multi-channel patch
cords are organized, including mc.interleave~, mc.deinterleave~, and mc.transpose~. Some
applications of these objects are described in MC Channel Topology.

964

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Spatialization

MC Spatialization
Topics

965

Objects

965

Examples

966

One of the applications for which MC is especially adept is working with multi-speaker systems and
spatialization. Multichannel source material can be transported to objects and manipulated as a
single unit, greatly reducing the amount of patching required to work with large sets of audio
routings and outputs.

Topics
You can learn more about issues related to spatialization by reviewing the following:

MC and Max for Live

MC Channel Topology

MC Recording and Playback

MC Dynamic Routing

Objects
In addition to the mc.* and mcs.* objects that perform multichannel audio manipulation, objects
that are particularly useful for spatialization include:

mc.dac~

965

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Spatialization

mc.adc~
mc.plugin~
mc.plugout~
mc.combine~
mc.separate~
mc.interleave~
mc.deinterleave~
mc.transpose~
mc.mixdown~

Examples
MC Granular - A 16-channel granular synthesizer mixed to two channels
Max for Live Channels - Output mapping for Max for Live

966

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Visualization and Probing

MC Visualization and Probing
Selecting a Display Channel

967

Signal Probing

968

Multichannel signals can be visualized using the following objects:

meter~ - standard LED-like metering
levelmeter~ - VU metering
number~ - displays the numerical value a signal
scope~ - oscilliscope-like signal display
spectroscope~ - displays the spectral content of a signal

Selecting a Display Channel
The number~, levelmeter~, scope~ and spectroscope~ objects will adapt to show all multichannel
signals, but will only display or foreground one channel at a time. Use the channel display selector to
bring one of the channels into focus.

Click on one of the channel display selector indicators to switch to the chosen channel.

967

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Visualization and Probing

The scope~ and levelmeter~ objects have an inactivealpha attribute that controls the relative
brightness of unselected channels.

Signal Probing
The Signal Probe works with MC signals.

968

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC Visualization and Probing

Enable Signal Probe in the Debug menu
Move the cursor over a multi-channel patch cord to view the signals it contains:

Press the down-arrow key to switch to one of the alternative displays:

969

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC vs MCS Objects

MC vs MCS Objects
As you work with MC you'll encounter a few objects beginning with mcs.

The "s" stands for single, meaning that an MCS object is a single instance with a single multichannel input and a single multi-channel output. An example is mcs.gen~ : If you make a Gen
patcher containing in 1, in 2, and in 3 operators, a normal gen~ object would show three inlets:

The mcs.gen~ version of this patch would have only one multi-channel inlet. You can connect a
multi-channel patch cord to this inlet and it will distribute the first three channels to the
corresponding in operators. Likewise, multiple outlets are provided as a single multi-channel outlet.

970

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC vs MCS Objects

By contrast, if you made an mc.gen~ with this same Gen patcher, you would see an object with
three inlets and two outlets. Each of these inlets corresponds to the in operator within the Gen
patcher, but with mc.gen~ there are multiple instances of the Gen patcher running inside the MC
wrapper, so multichannel signals connected to these inlets are distributed to each Gen instance.

971

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / MC vs MCS Objects

Another group of MCS objects deal with multichannel buffer~ data. If you create a buffer~ object
with four channels of audio data, the mcs.play~ object will combine all four output channels of this
audio data into one multichannel output. By contrast, mc.play~ lets you create multiple "players" of
the same data in the MC Wrapper.

In deciding whether you want the MC or MCS version of play~, ask yourself whether you want to
play one copy of a sound with multiple channels, or several copies of the same sound you can
control independently.

972

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Messages to the MC Wrapper

Messages to the MC Wrapper
Setting a Number of Object Instances Within the Wrapper

973

Changing the @chans Attribute

973

Setting Initial Values of Instances Within the Wrapper
Sending Messages to All Instances Within the Wrapper

974
974

Sending Messages to a Specific Instance Within the Wrapper

975

Applying a List of Values to Successive Instances Within the Wrapper

976

Applying a Sequence of Values to Successive Instances Within the Wrapper

977

Most MC objects exist inside the MC Wrapper. The wrapper holds one or more instances of an
object. Using features specific to the wrapper, you can address all instances at once or target
specific instances.

Finally, a powerful set of wrapper messages permit simultaneous high-level control of all object
instances.

Setting a Number of Object Instances Within the Wrapper
The @chans attribute sets the count of instances of an object xxx~ within a wrapper object
mc.xxx~ . If the chans attribute has a value other than 0, the instance count is fixed and does not

auto-adapt to the maximum number of channels in any multichannel signal connected to its inlets.
Typically @chans is a typed-in argument to a wrapper object.

Changing the @chans Attribute
While the @chans attribute can be changed during the lifetime of an object, the actual
multichannel outputs of the object will not update to reflect the new channel count until the audio
is restarted.

In this example, if the chans 4 message is sent to the mc.*~ object while the audio is running, the
output will not change. But if you turn the audio off and on again after having sent the @chans 4

973

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Messages to the MC Wrapper

message, it will send a four-channel signal to the mc.unpack~ meaning the four right outputs of
mc.unpack~ will change to 0.

Setting Initial Values of Instances Within the Wrapper
If you simply type mc.cycle~ 440 all cycle~ objects within the wrapper will have the initial
frequency value of 440. To assign different initial values to wrapper instances, use the @values
typed-in attribute. For example, mc.cycle~ @chans 3 @values 440 660 880 would assign a
frequency of 440 to the first cycle~ object, a frequency of 660 to the second cycle~ object, and a
frequency of 880 to the third object.

You can combine both arguments if you want the first few objects to be set to different values but
the rest set to a default value. For example, mc.cycle~ 200 @chans 8 @values 440 660 880
would set the first three cycle~ objects to 440, 660, and 880 and the rest of the objects to 200.

Sending Messages to All Instances Within the Wrapper
To send a message to all instances of an object within the wrapper, simply send the message. It will
be sent to each instance. In this example, after clicking the message 660 connected to the
mc.cycle~, all 16 instances will have the frequency 660.

974

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Messages to the MC Wrapper

Sending Messages to a Specific Instance Within the Wrapper
To send a message to a specific instance of an object within the wrapper, precede the message by
the word setvalue followed by the instance number starting at 1. For example, after clicking the
message setvalue 1 660 connected to the mc.cycle~ shown below, the first instance will have a
frequency of 660 while the remaining 15 instances will retain their initial frequency of 440.

You can also target specific instances with the mc.target object. Sending any message into the left
inlet of mc.target outputs that message preceded by setvalue and the current channel (voice)
number. Here is the same example as above. First the message 1 is sent to the right inlet of
mc.target, then the 660 is sent. The mc.target object produces the message setvalue 1 660 .

Many event-based objects in MC follow a convention of sending a voice number out a rightmost
outlet immediately before a message out a different outlet, making it possible to use mc.target to

975

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Messages to the MC Wrapper

control specific object instances with these events.

Applying a List of Values to Successive Instances Within the Wrapper
Use the applyvalues message a send single value within a list to successive instances within the
wrapper. In this example, after clicking the applyvalues 440 660 880 message box, the first
instance of cycle~ within the mc.cycle~ object will have a value of 440, the second will have a value
of 660 and the third will have a value of 880.

In addition to applying numerical values, applyvalues can set single-valued message arguments
and attribute values. In this example, the @cutoff attribute of each lores~ instance is set to a
different value based on the arguments to the applyvalues message sent to mc.lores~.

976

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Messages to the MC Wrapper

When showing the inspector an MC Wrapper object, the values shown for an object's attributes are
for the first instance only along with wrapper-specific attributes such as chans .

Applying a Sequence of Values to Successive Instances Within the
Wrapper
To apply a repeating sequence of values to all wrapper instances, use the replicatevalues
message. With one argument, replicatevalues is the same as simply sending that value to all
instances. With two or more arguments, replicatevalues cycles through the arguments applying
them to each instance in succession. For example, clicking the replicatevalues 1 2 3 message
in this example will set all values of mc.sig~ to a repeating cycle of 1, 2, and 3.

977

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Multichannel Delay Systems

Multichannel Delay Systems
Multichannel Delay Time Control
Multichannel Feedback Control

978
979

The mc.tapin~ and mc.tapout~ objects let you build networks of multichannel delay lines. The
mc.tapin~ object auto-adapts to the number of channels in the multichannel patch cord connected
to its input, creating individual delay memories for each input channel. Connected mc.tapout~
objects create one or more multichannel taps of this multichannel delay line.

Multichannel Delay Time Control
Using multichannel signals fed to the input(s) of mc.tapout~ that represent delay times, you can
control the individual delay times of each of the channels in each multichannel tap.

Here is an example where we use a four-channel delay line with two output taps. Each tap has a
four-channel multichannel signal controlling its delay times. The result is eight outputs, each with its
own unique delay time.

978

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Multichannel Delay Systems

Multichannel Feedback Control
You can feed the signals from mc.tapout~ back into the input of mc.tapin~ to create multichannel
feedback delays. By multiplying the output gains with mc.multigain~ you can control the feedback
levels of each channel individually.

979

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Multichannel Delay Systems

Note that the multichannel inputs to mc.tapin~ are automatically added to the audio input coming
from the mc.cycle~.

980

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Polyphony Using mc.poly~

Polyphony Using mc.poly~
The poly~ object manages polyphony for multiple instances of a patcher. The poly~ object always
copies audio inputs to each patcher instance, and mixes the output of each patcher instance
together at the object's outlets.

The mc.poly~ object uses multichannel signals to operate in a more flexible way. A multichannel
input to mc.poly~ assigns the audio for each channel to its corresponding patcher instance (poly~
voice). The first audio input channel in the signal is passed to an in~ object within the first patcher
instance, the second audio input channel in the signal is passed to an in~ object in the second
patcher instance, and so on.

Similarly, the output fed to out~ objects in a patcher inside mc.poly~ is not mixed with the other
patchers, it comes directly out to the corresponding channel of a multichannel signal.

Here is a patcher that simply passes audio input arriving at an in~ directly an out~:

Here is a comparison of poly~ and mc.poly~ using simple numbers as input to four instances of this
patcher loaded in each object. For the poly~ case, we feed a single-channel signal of 1 to the object
and it produces a single-channel output:

981

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Polyphony Using mc.poly~

Note that the output is 4, representing the sum of all the patchers mixing their inputs together.

For the mc.poly~ case, we will feed in a four-channel multichannel signal consisting of 1 in the first
channel and 0 in the other three channels.

In this case, the output multichannel signal is equal to the input multichannel signal.

One use of mc.poly~ would be to load a simple patcher to use as an audio effect operating in
parallel on each channel of a multichannel signal. If you want to mix the output of all the effects,
you can do that later with mc.mixdown~ or mc.op~.

982

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Polyphony Using mc.poly~

983

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Polyphony with Multiple Patchers

Polyphony with Multiple Patchers
Both the poly~ and mc.poly~ objects can contain different patchers for each voice. The names of
the voice patches are set using the @patchernames attribute.

You can use mc.poly~ to load a bank of patchers to use as audio effects operating in parallel on
each channel of a multichannel signal. If you want to mix the output of all the effects, you can do
that later with mc.mixdown~ or mc.op~.

984

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Processing Events from MC Objects

Processing Events from MC Objects
Events and MC Values

985

Voice outputs from poly~ and mc.poly~

986

See Also

987

Events and MC Values
It is often useful to obtain values from an audio signal and use them in event-level processing. With
standard MSP signals, you can use the snapshot~ object to get an instantaneous value from an
audio signal at a regular interval.

In the case of multi-channel signals, things are more complex: at each measurement, you would get
a list with a value for each input channel. Instead of producing a list, the mc.snapshot~ object has
an additional outlet that provides a voice number.

At each sampling interval, mc.snapshot~ outputs each of the values from each of the incoming
samples, but outputs the voice number before the signal value. This combination of values can be
used with a routing object (like mc.route) to send each value to a unique location. Alternatively, if
you do want a list of all the snapshot values, mc.makelist can do that for you.

985

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Processing Events from MC Objects

Voice outputs from poly~ and mc.poly~
Similar to the mc.snapshot~ object, both poly~ and mc.poly~ may have an additional voice output.
This is only created when contained in a poly~ contains an event (non-signal) outlet.

You can use the voice output, along with a routing object such as mc.route to use the event output
to control other parts of your patch.

986

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Processing Events from MC Objects

See Also
MC Event-Based Objects

987

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using mc.gen with the MC Wrapper

Using mc.gen with the MC Wrapper
mc.gen Connections

988

Using MC Operators

989

Target Connections

989

The MC Wrapper contains a set of messages that offer high-level algorithmic control over a set of
individual objects. For example, using the deviate message with changing values for ranges you
can generate and apply a set of random values for signal object parameters such as oscillator
frequency.

For more possibilities than those offered by the basic wrapper messages, the mc.gen~ object offers
a way to create algorithms for controlling objects in the wrapper. As an example, we will show an
example using the @expr mode of Gen to create a simple range.

(Note: This feature is already available as the spread message to the wrapper but it illustrates a basic
pattern you can customize.)

mc.gen Connections
The mc.gen object is not an audio object; it accepts and produces only Max messages. However,
mc.gen uses the MC Wrapper; it contains multiple gen objects. Specify the number inputs using the
@chans attribute.

Since mc.gen uses the MC Wrapper, you can connect an audio signal to one of its inputs and it will
auto-adapt its channel count. (We will use this trick in our complete example below.)

The mc.gen object contains an extra rightmost outlet that outputs a voice number immediately
before any values come out its other outlets. This permits identification of the gen instance that is
sending output. The mc.target, mc.route, and mc.makelist objects make it simple to use voice outlet
for further isolation of mc.gen output.

988

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using mc.gen with the MC Wrapper

Using MC Operators
To generate a range of control values, one for each wrapper instance, we will need to use the MCspecific mc_channel and mc_channelcount operators in our Gen expression. A formula for
generating the range is:

out_channel = min + (max - min) * (channel / number_of_channels)

This will scale a range evenly over a space defined by min and max. We will use in1 as our range
minimum and in2 as our range maximum. As a Gen expression, this would be:

out1 = in1 + (in2 - in1) \* (mc_channel / mc_channelcount)

Target Connections
Now we want to use the rightmost voice outlet of mc.gen in conjunction with mc.target to control
an object in the MC Wrapper. In this example, we will control the frequencies of a bank of sawtooth
oscillators in mc.saw~.

989

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using mc.gen with the MC Wrapper

By connecting the rightmost outlet of mc.gen to mc.target, the per-voice range value is properly
routed to the correct saw~ instance inside mc.saw~.

990

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using Plug-ins with MC

Using Plug-ins with MC
Single Plug-in, Multi-Channel Signals

991

Multiple Copies of a Plug-in

991

Accessing Parameters of Individual Plug-in Instances

993

Working with Max for Live Devices

994

In MC, you can work with multiple copies of a plug-in to produce multiple channels of audio, or use
multi-channel inputs and output with a single copy of the plug-in.

Single Plug-in, Multi-Channel Signals
The mcs.vst~ object allows you to work with a single instance of a plug-in, but have multi-channel
inputs and outputs. In the most basic case, you can create an mcs.vst~ with a favorite stereo VST
effect, and have a 2-channel MC signal routed into and out of the effect.

If the plug-in is capable of more than two input or output channels, you can define the input and
output channel counts with the first two arguments to mcs.vst~.

Multiple Copies of a Plug-in

991

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using Plug-ins with MC

The mc.vst~ object works like other MC Wrapper objects: it contains multiple instances of a plug-in
within a single Max object. The number of instances will auto-adapt to the number of inputs.

The number of inputs and outputs to the plug-in are defined by the channel argument(s) to mc.vst~,
and each of the inlets and outlets will be a multichannel signal.

For example, a mc.vst~ defined to have two I/O channels and four instances will produce two fourchannel signals containing the "left" and "right" inputs to the four plug-in instances.

When using a VST instrument plug-in, you will need to define the number of MC output channels to
be used, preferably as a typed-in @chans argument, since you won't be sending the plug-in any
audio inputs.

992

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using Plug-ins with MC

Accessing Parameters of Individual Plug-in Instances
When using mc.vst~ to host multiple copies of the same plug-in, you may want to change the
parameters of each copy to different settings. This can be done using the mcisolate attribute of
the mc.vst~ object, as well as the mc.target and mc.targetlist objects to route messages to a single
instance of the plug-in.

To alter individual instances of a plug-in's parameters:

Enable the mcisolate attribute of mc.vst~ using a typed-in argument, message box, or
attrui.
Using mc.target or mc.targetlist, send a setvalue message followed by the instance
number and desired parameter name to mc.vst~. This will change the parameter for the
targeted instance only.
To target all instances of the mc.vst~ object, you can target using voice number 0 (zero), or
disable the mcisolate attribute to distribute the change to all instances of the plug-in.

993

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using Plug-ins with MC

When mcisolate is off, any parameter change for any voice - or any change to the user interface
of the plug-in - will result in that parameter being changed in all of the instances of the plug-in.

Working with Max for Live Devices
Max for Live devices are hosted similarly to VST plug-ins, using the mcs.amxd~ object for a single
instance, and mc.amxd~ for multiple-instance applications.

994

User Guide / Appendix A: MC Extended / Using Plug-ins with MC

If you are showing the device's interface in your patcher (by toggling on the Show View In Patcher
attribute), you can choose the instance of the device that is displayed by using the displaychan
attribute.

995

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended

Appendix B: Lua Extended

996

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

jit.gl.lua Color Bindings
Color Names

998

hue (HSLA, factor)

Shift the hue part of an HSL[A] color by a factor- HSLA A table of HSL and optionally an A value

factor The shifting factor

saturate (HSLA, factor)

Scale the saturation part of an HSL[A] color by a factor- HSLA A table of HSL and optionally an A
value

factor The scaling factor

lighten (HSLA, factor)

Scale the lightness part of an HSL[A] color by a factor- HSLA A table of HSL and optionally an A
value

factor The scaling factor

997

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

RGBtoHSL (...)

Convert RGB[A] [0, 1] to HSL[A] [0, 1]If the input has an alpha channel, it will be appended to
output

... A table or unpacked list of RGB[A] values

HSLtoRGB (...)

Convert HSL[A] [0, 1] to RGB[A] [0, 1]If the input has an alpha channel, it will be appended to the
output

... A table or unpacked list of HSL[A] values

Color Names
aliceblue
antiquewhite

-

-------------aquamarine

-

-----------azure

-

------beige

-

-------

998

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

bisque

-

-------black

-

------blanchedalmond

-

---------------blueviolet

-

-----------brown

-

------burlywood

-

----------chartreuse

-

-----------chocolate

-

----------coral

-

------cornflowerblue

-

---------------cornsilk

-

---------crimson

-

---------

999

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

darkgoldenrod

-

--------------darkgray

-

---------darkgrey

-

---------darkkhaki

-

----------darkmagenta

-

------------darkorange

-

-----------darkorchid

-

-----------darkred

-

--------darksalmon

-

-----------darkseagreen

-

-------------darkviolet

-

-----------deeppink

-

----------

1000

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

dimgray

-

--------dimgrey

-

--------firebrick

-

----------floralwhite

-

------------fuchsia

-

--------gainsboro

-

----------ghostwhite

-

-----------gold

-

-----goldenrod

-

----------gray

-

-----grey

-

-----greenyellow

-

-------------

1001

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

honeydew

-

---------hotpink

-

--------indianred

-

----------ivory

-

------khaki

-

------lavender

-

---------lavenderblush

-

--------------lawngreen

-

----------lemonchiffon

-

-------------lightblue

-

----------lightcoral

-

-----------lightcyan

-

-----------

1002

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

lightgoldenrodyellow

-

---------------------lightgray

-

----------lightgreen

-

-----------lightgrey

-

----------lightpink

-

----------lightsalmon

-

------------lightskyblue

-

-------------lightslategray

-

---------------lightslategrey

-

---------------lightsteelblue

-

---------------lightyellow

-

------------linen

-

-------

1003

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

magenta

-

--------maroon

-

-------mediumaquamarine

-

-----------------mediumorchid

-

-------------mediumpurple

-

-------------mediumslateblue

-

----------------mediumvioletred

-

----------------mintcream

-

----------mistyrose

-

----------moccasin

-

---------navajowhite

-

------------oldlace

-

---------

1004

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

olive

-

------olivedrab

-

----------orange

-

-------orangered

-

----------orchid

-

-------palegoldenrod

-

--------------palegreen

-

----------paleturquoise

-

--------------palevioletred

-

--------------papayawhip

-

-----------peachpuff

-

----------peru

-

------

1005

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

pink

-

-----plum

-

-----powderblue

-

-----------purple

-

-------red

-

----rosybrown

-

----------saddlebrown

-

------------salmon

-

-------sandybrown

-

-----------seashell

-

---------sienna

-

-------silver

-

--------

1006

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

skyblue

-

--------slateblue

-

----------slategray

-

----------slategrey

-

----------snow

-

-----tan

-

----thistle

-

--------tomato

-

-------violet

-

-------wheat

-

------white

-

------whitesmoke

-

------------

1007

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Color Bindings

yellow

-

-------yellowgreen

-

-------------

1008

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings
The OpenGL bindings for jit.gl.lua are found in the opengl module, which is built-in to the object.
To access the bindings, simpply use the built-in Lua function, require , to load the module as
follows:

-- load in the module and set some aliases local
local GL = gl

gl = require( "opengl" )

The idiom above allows us to write code that more closely resembles C-style OpenGL code. For the
OpenGL Utility (GLU) functions see the For the standard OpenGL bindings, see the jit.gl.lua OpenGL
GLU Bindings.

Accum (op, value)

Operate on the accumulation bufferOpenGL Documentation: glAccum

op Specifies the accumulation buffer operation. Symbolic constants GL_ACCUM,

GL_LOAD, GL_ADD, GL_MULT, and GL_RETURN are accepted.
value Specifies a floating-point value used in the accumulation buffer operation. op

determines how value is used.

AlphaFunc (func, ref)

Specify the alpha test functionOpenGL Documentation: glAlphaFunc

1009

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

func Specifies the alpha comparison function. Symbolic constants GL_NEVER, GL_LESS,

GL_EQUAL, GL_LEQUAL, GL_GREATER, GL_NOTEQUAL, GL_GEQUAL, and GL_ALWAYS
are accepted. The initial value is GL_ALWAYS
ref Specifies the reference value that incoming alpha values are compared to. This value is

clamped to the range 0 1 , where 0 represents the lowest possible alpha value and 1 the
highest possible value. The initial reference value is 0

Begin (mode)

Delimit the vertices of a primitive or a group of like primitivesOpenGL Documentation: glBegin

mode Specifies the primitive or primitives that will be created from vertices presented

between glBegin and the subsequent glEnd. Ten symbolic constants are accepted:
GL_POINTS, GL_LINES, GL_LINE_STRIP, GL_LINE_LOOP, GL_TRIANGLES,
GL_TRIANGLE_STRIP, GL_TRIANGLE_FAN, GL_QUADS, GL_QUAD_STRIP, and
GL_POLYGON.

BlendFunc (sfactor, dfactor)

Specify pixel arithmeticOpenGL Documentation: glBlendFunc

sfactor Specifies how the red, green, blue, and alpha source blending factors are

computed. The following symbolic constants are accepted: GL_ZERO, GL_ONE,
GL_SRC_COLOR, GL_ONE_MINUS_SRC_COLOR, GL_DST_COLOR,
GL_ONE_MINUS_DST_COLOR, GL_SRC_ALPHA, GL_ONE_MINUS_SRC_ALPHA,
GL_DST_ALPHA, GL_ONE_MINUS_DST_ALPHA, GL_CONSTANT_COLOR,
GL_ONE_MINUS_CONSTANT_COLOR, GL_CONSTANT_ALPHA,
GL_ONE_MINUS_CONSTANT_ALPHA, and GL_SRC_ALPHA_SATURATE. The initial value is
GL_ONE.
dfactor Specifies how the red, green, blue, and alpha destination blending factors are

computed. The same constants are accepted as for sfactor.

1010

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

CallList (list)

Execute a display listOpenGL Documentation: glCallList

list Specifies the integer name of the display list to be executed.

Clear (mask)

Clear buffers to preset valuesOpenGL Documentation: glClear

mask Bitwise OR of masks that indicate the buffers to be cleared. The four masks are

GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT, GL_DEPTH_BUFFER_BIT, GL_ACCUM_BUFFER_BIT, and
GL_STENCIL_BUFFER_BIT.

ClearAccum (...)

Specify clear values for the accumulation bufferOpenGL Documentation: glClearAccum

... Either a 4 numbers or a table specifying the red, green, blue, and alpha values used

when the accumulation buffer is cleared. The initial values are all 0.

ClearColor (...)

Specify clear values for the color buffersOpenGL Documentation: glClearColor

1011

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

... Either a 4 numbers or a table specifying the red, green, blue, and alpha values used

when the color buffers are cleared. The initial values are all 0.

ClearDepth (depth)

Specify the clear value for the depth bufferOpenGL Documentation: glClearDepth

depth Specifies the depth value used when the depth buffer is cleared. The initial value is

1.

ClearIndex (c)

Specify the clear value for the color index buffersOpenGL Documentation: glClearIndex

c Specifies the index used when the color index buffers are cleared. The initial value is 0.

ClearStencil (c)

Specify the clear value for the stencil bufferOpenGL Documentation: glClearStencil

c Specifies the index used when the stencil buffer is cleared. The initial value is 0.

ClipPlane (plane, equation)

Specify a plane against which all geometry is clippedOpenGL Documentation: glClipPlane

1012

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

plane Specifies which clipping plane is being positioned. Symbolic names of the form

GL_CLIP_PLANEi, where i is an integer between 0 and GL_MAX_CLIP_PLANES -1 , are
accepted.
equation Specifies the address of an array of four double-precision floating-point values.

These values are interpreted as a plane equation.

Color (...)

Set the current colorOpenGL Documentation: glColor

... Specify either 3 or 4 numbers or a table for new red, green, blue and [alpha] values for

the current color. The default value is (0, 0, 0, 1).

ColorMask (...)

Enable and disable writing of frame buffer color componentsOpenGL Documentation: glColorMask

... Either 4 numbers or a table specifying whether red, green, blue, and alpha can or

cannot be written into the frame buffer. The initial values are all GL_TRUE, indicating that
the color components can be written.

ColorMaterial (face, mode)

Cause a material color to track the current colorOpenGL Documentation: glColorMaterial

face Specifies whether front, back, or both front and back material parameters should

track the current color. Accepted values are GL_FRONT, GL_BACK, and

1013

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_FRONT_AND_BACK. The initial value is GL_FRONT_AND_BACK.
mode Specifies which of several material parameters track the current color. Accepted

values are GL_EMISSION, GL_AMBIENT, GL_DIFFUSE, GL_SPECULAR, and
GL_AMBIENT_AND_DIFFUSE. The initial value is GL_AMBIENT_AND_DIFFUSE.

CopyPixels (x, y, width, height, type)

Copy pixels in the frame bufferOpenGL Documentation: glCopyPixels

x Specify the x window coordinate of the lower left corner of the rectangular region of

pixels to be copied.
y Specify the y window coordinate of the lower left corner of the rectangular region of

pixels to be copied.
width Specify the horizontal dimensions of the rectangular region of pixels to be copied.

Both must be nonnegative.
height Specify the vertical dimensions of the rectangular region of pixels to be copied.

Both must be nonnegative.
type Specifies whether color values, depth values, or stencil values are to be copied.

Symbolic constants GL_COLOR, GL_DEPTH, and GL_STENCIL are accepted.

CopyTexImage (target, level, internalformat, x, y, width, [height], border)

Copy pixels into a 1D or 2D texture imageIf no height argument is given, glCopyTexImage1D will be
used, otherwise, glCopyTexImage2D be used. Example usage: 1D case:
gl.CopyTexImage(GL.TEXTURE_1D, 0, GL.RGBA, 0, 0, 128, 0) 2D case:
gl.CopyTexImage(GL.TEXTURE_2D, 0, GL.RGBA, 0, 0, 128, 128, 0) OpenGL Documentation:
glCopyTexImage1D, glCopyTexImage2D

target Only relevant in the 2D case. Specifies the target texture. Must be

GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_X,

1014

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_X, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_Y,
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_Y, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_Z, or
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_Z.
level Specifies the level-of-detail number. Level 0 is the base image level. Level n is the

nth mipmap reduction image.
internalformat Specifies the internal format of the texture. See OpenGL documentation

for accepted values.
x Specify the x window coordinate of the left corner of the row of pixels to be copied.
y Specify the y window coordinate of the left corner of the row of pixels to be copied.
width Specifies the width of the texture image. Must be 0 or 2 n + 2 border for some

integer n.
[height] Specifies the height of the texture image. Must be 0 or 2 m + 2 border for some

integer m. The height of the texture image in the 1D case is 1.
border Specifies the width of the border. Must be either 0 or 1.

CopyTexSubImage (target, level, xoffset, [yoffset], x, y, width, [height])

Copy a 1D or 2D texture subimageIf no yoffset or height argument is given, glCopyTexSubImage1D
will be used, otherwise, glCopyTexSubImage2D be used. Example usage: 1D case:
gl.glCopyTexSubImage(GL.TEXTURE_1D, 0, 32, 0, 0, 64) 2D case:
gl.glCopyTexSubImage(GL.TEXTURE_2D, 0, 16, 24, 0, 0, 128, 128) OpenGL Documentation:
glCopyTexSubImage1D, glCopyTexSubImage2D

target Only relevant in the 2D case. Specifies the target texture. Must be

GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_X,
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_X, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_Y,
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_Y, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_Z, or
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_Z.
level Specifies the level-of-detail number. Level 0 is the base image level. Level n is the

nth mipmap reduction image.
xoffset Specifies a texel offset in the x direction within the texture array..

1015

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

[yoffset] Specifies a texel offset in the y direction within the texture array..
x Specify the x window coordinate of the left corner of the row of pixels to be copied.
y Specify the y window coordinate of the left corner of the row of pixels to be copied.
width Specifies the width of the texture subimage.
[height] Specifies the height of the texture subimage.

CullFace (mode)

Specify whether front- or back-facing facets can be culledOpenGL Documentation: glCullFace

mode Specifies whether front- or back-facing facets are candidates for culling. Symbolic

constants GL_FRONT, GL_BACK, and GL_FRONT_AND_BACK are accepted. The initial
value is GL_BACK.

DeleteLists (list, range)

Delete a contiguous group of display listsOpenGL Documentation: glDeleteLists

list Specifies the integer name of the first display list to delete.
range Specifies the number of display lists to delete.

DepthFunc (func)

Specify the value used for depth buffer comparisonsOpenGL Documentation: glDepthFunc

1016

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

func Specifies the depth comparison function. Symbolic constants GL_NEVER, GL_LESS,

GL_EQUAL, GL_LEQUAL, GL_GREATER, GL_NOTEQUAL, GL_GEQUAL, and GL_ALWAYS
are accepted. The initial value is GL_LESS.

DepthMask (flag)

Enable or disable writing into the depth bufferOpenGL Documentation: glDepthMask

flag Specifies whether the depth buffer is enabled for writing. If flag is GL_FALSE, depth

buffer writing is disabled. Otherwise, it is enabled. Initially, depth buffer writing is enabled.

DepthRange (near, far)

Specify mapping of depth values from normalized device coordinates to window
coordinatesOpenGL Documentation: glDepthRange

near Specifies the mapping of the near clipping plane to window coordinates. The initial

value is 0.
far Specifies the mapping of the far clipping plane to window coordinates. The initial value

is 1.

Disable (cap)

Disable server-side GL capabilitiesOpenGL Documentation: glDisable

cap Specifies a symbolic constant indicating a GL capability.

1017

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

DrawBuffer (mode)

Specify which color buffers are to be drawn intoOpenGL Documentation: glDrawBuffer

mode Specifies up to four color buffers to be drawn into. Symbolic constants GL_NONE,

GL_FRONT_LEFT, GL_FRONT_RIGHT, GL_BACK_LEFT, GL_BACK_RIGHT, GL_FRONT,
GL_BACK, GL_LEFT, GL_RIGHT, GL_FRONT_AND_BACK, and GL_AUXi, where i is between
0 and the value of GL_AUX_BUFFERS minus 1, are accepted. (GL_AUX_BUFFERS is not the
upper limit; use glGet to query the number of available aux buffers.) The initial value is
GL_FRONT for single-buffered contexts, and GL_BACK for double-buffered contexts

EdgeFlag (flag)

Flag edges as either boundary or nonboundaryOpenGL Documentation: glEdgeFlag

flag Specifies the current edge flag value, either GL_TRUE or GL_FALSE. The initial value

is GL_TRUE.

Enable (cap)

Enable server-side GL capabilitiesOpenGL Documentation: glEnable

cap Specifies a symbolic constant indicating a GL capability.

End ()

1018

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

Delimit the vertices of a primitive or a group of like primitivesOpenGL Documentation: glEnd

EndList ()

End the creation or replacement of a display listOpenGL Documentation: glEndList

Finish ()

Block until all GL execution is completeOpenGL Documentation: glFinish

Flush ()

Force execution of GL commands in finite timeOpenGL Documentation: glFlush

Fog (pname, ...)

Specify fog parametersOpenGL Documentation: glFog

pname Specifies a single-valued fog parameter. GL_FOG_MODE, GL_FOG_DENSITY,

GL_FOG_START, GL_FOG_END, GL_FOG_INDEX, and GL_FOG_COORD_SRC are accepted.
... Specifies the value that pname will be set to.

FrontFace (mode)

1019

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

Define front- and back-facing polygonsOpenGL Documentation: glFrontFace

mode Specifies the orientation of front-facing polygons. GL_CW and GL_CCW are

accepted. The initial value is GL_CCW.

Frustum (left, right, bottom, top, near, far)

Multiply the current matrix by a perspective matrixOpenGL Documentation: glFrustum

left Specify the coordinates for the left vertical clipping plane.
right Specify the coordinates for the right vertical clipping plane.
bottom Specify the coordinates for the top horizontal clipping plane.
top Specify the coordinates for the bottom horizontal clipping plane.
near Specify the distance to the near depth clipping plane. Must be positive.
far Specify the distance to the far depth clipping plane. Must be positive.

GenLists (range)

Generate a contiguous set of empty display listsOpenGL Documentation: glGenLists

range Specifies the number of contiguous empty display lists to be generated.

Get (pname)

Return the value or values of a selected parameterOpenGL Documentation: glGet

1020

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

pname Specifies the parameter value to be returned. See documentation for the list of

accepted values.

GetClipPlane (plane)

Return the coefficients of the specified clipping planeOpenGL Documentation: glGetClipPlane

plane Specifies a clipping plane. The number of clipping planes depends on the

implementation, but at least six clipping planes are supported. They are identified by
symbolic names of the form GL_CLIP_PLANE i where i ranges from 0 to the value of
GL_MAX_CLIP_PLANES - 1.

GetError ()

Return error informationOpenGL Documentation: glGetError

GetLight (light, pname)

Return light source parameter valuesOpenGL Documentation: glGetLight

light Specifies a light source. The number of possible lights depends on the

implementation, but at least eight lights are supported. They are identified by symbolic
names of the form GL_LIGHTi where i ranges from 0 to the value of GL_MAX_LIGHTS - 1.
pname Specifies a light source parameter for light. Accepted symbolic names are

GL_AMBIENT, GL_DIFFUSE, GL_SPECULAR, GL_POSITION, GL_SPOT_DIRECTION,
GL_SPOT_EXPONENT, GL_SPOT_CUTOFF, GL_CONSTANT_ATTENUATION,
GL_LINEAR_ATTENUATION, and GL_QUADRATIC_ATTENUATION.

1021

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GetMaterial (target, pname)

Return material parametersOpenGL Documentation: glGetMaterial

target Specifies which of the two materials is being queried. GL_FRONT or GL_BACK are

accepted, representing the front and back materials, respectively.
pname Specifies the material parameter to return. GL_AMBIENT, GL_DIFFUSE,

GL_SPECULAR, GL_EMISSION, GL_SHININESS, and GL_COLOR_INDEXES are accepted.

GetString (name)

Return a string describing the current GL connectionOpenGL Documentation: glGetString

name Specifies a symbolic constant, one of GL_VENDOR, GL_RENDERER, GL_VERSION,

GL_SHADING_LANGUAGE_VERSION, or GL_EXTENSIONS.

GetTexEnv (target, pname)

Return texture environment parametersOpenGL Documentation: glGetTexEnv

target Specifies a texture environment. May be GL_TEXTURE_ENV,

GL_TEXTURE_FILTER_CONTROL, or GL_POINT_SPRITE.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of a texture environment parameter. Accepted values

are GL_TEXTURE_ENV_MODE, GL_TEXTURE_ENV_COLOR, GL_TEXTURE_LOD_BIAS,
GL_COMBINE_RGB, GL_COMBINE_ALPHA, GL_SRC0_RGB, GL_SRC1_RGB,
GL_SRC2_RGB, GL_SRC0_ALPHA, GL_SRC1_ALPHA, GL_SRC2_ALPHA,
GL_OPERAND0_RGB, GL_OPERAND1_RGB, GL_OPERAND2_RGB,

1022

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_OPERAND0_ALPHA, GL_OPERAND1_ALPHA, GL_OPERAND2_ALPHA,
GL_RGB_SCALE, GL_ALPHA_SCALE, or GL_COORD_REPLACE.

GetTexGen (coord, pname)

Return texture coordinate generation parametersOpenGL Documentation: glGetTexGen

coord Specifies a texture coordinate. Must be GL_S, GL_T, GL_R, or GL_Q.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of the value(s) to be returned. Must be either

GL_TEXTURE_GEN_MODE or the name of one of the texture generation plane equations:
GL_OBJECT_PLANE or GL_EYE_PLANE.

GetTexLevelParameter (target, level, pname)

Return texture parameter values for a specific level of detailOpenGL Documentation:
glGetTexLevelParameter

target Specifies the symbolic name of the target texture, either GL_TEXTURE_1D,

GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_3D, GL_PROXY_TEXTURE_1D, GL_PROXY_TEXTURE_2D,
GL_PROXY_TEXTURE_3D, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_X,
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_X, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_Y,
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_Y, GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_POSITIVE_Z,
GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP_NEGATIVE_Z, or GL_PROXY_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP.
level Specifies the level-of-detail number of the desired image. Level 0 is the base image

level. Level n is the nth mipmap reduction image.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of a texture parameter. GL_TEXTURE_WIDTH,

GL_TEXTURE_HEIGHT, GL_TEXTURE_DEPTH, GL_TEXTURE_INTERNAL_FORMAT,
GL_TEXTURE_BORDER, GL_TEXTURE_RED_SIZE, GL_TEXTURE_GREEN_SIZE,
GL_TEXTURE_BLUE_SIZE, GL_TEXTURE_ALPHA_SIZE, GL_TEXTURE_LUMINANCE_SIZE,
GL_TEXTURE_INTENSITY_SIZE, GL_TEXTURE_DEPTH_SIZE,

1023

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_TEXTURE_COMPRESSED, and GL_TEXTURE_COMPRESSED_IMAGE_SIZE are
accepted.

GetTexParameter (target, pname)

Return texture parameter valuesOpenGL Documentation: glGetTexParameter

target Specifies the symbolic name of the target texture. GL_TEXTURE_1D,

GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_3D, and GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP are accepted.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of a texture parameter. GL_TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER,

GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_TEXTURE_MIN_LOD, GL_TEXTURE_MAX_LOD,
GL_TEXTURE_BASE_LEVEL, GL_TEXTURE_MAX_LEVEL, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_S,
GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_T, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_R, GL_TEXTURE_BORDER_COLOR,
GL_TEXTURE_PRIORITY, GL_TEXTURE_RESIDENT, GL_TEXTURE_COMPARE_MODE,
GL_TEXTURE_COMPARE_FUNC, GL_DEPTH_TEXTURE_MODE, and
GL_GENERATE_MIPMAP are accepted.

Hint (target, mode)

Specify implementation-specific hintsOpenGL Documentation: glHint

target Specifies a symbolic constant indicating the behavior to be controlled.

GL_FOG_HINT, GL_GENERATE_MIPMAP_HINT, GL_LINE_SMOOTH_HINT,
GL_PERSPECTIVE_CORRECTION_HINT, GL_POINT_SMOOTH_HINT,
GL_POLYGON_SMOOTH_HINT, GL_TEXTURE_COMPRESSION_HINT, and
GL_FRAGMENT_SHADER_DERIVATIVE_HINT are accepted.
mode Specifies a symbolic constant indicating the desired behavior. GL_FASTEST,

GL_NICEST, and GL_DONT_CARE are accepted.

Index (c)

1024

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

Set the current color indexOpenGL Documentation: glIndex

c Specifies the new value for the current color index.

IndexMask (mask)

Control the writing of individual bits in the color index buffersOpenGL Documentation:
glIndexMask

mask Specifies a bit mask to enable and disable the writing of individual bits in the color

index buffers. Initially, the mask is all 1's.

InitNames ()

Initialize the name stackOpenGL Documentation: glInitNames

IsEnabled (cap)

Test whether a capability is enabledOpenGL Documentation: glIsEnabled

cap Specifies a symbolic constant indicating a GL capability.

IsList (list)

Determine if a name corresponds to a display listOpenGL Documentation: glIsList

1025

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

list Specifies a symbolic constant indicating a GL capability.

IsTexture (texture)

Determine if a name corresponds to a textureOpenGL Documentation: glIsTexture

texture Specifies a value that may be the name of a texture.

Light (light, pname, params)

Set light source parametersOpenGL Documentation: glLight

light Specifies a light. The number of lights depends on the implementation, but at least

eight lights are supported. They are identified by symbolic names of the form GL_LIGHTi,
where i ranges from 0 to the value of GL_MAX_LIGHTS - 1.
pname Specifies a light source parameter for light. GL_AMBIENT, GL_DIFFUSE,

GL_SPECULAR, GL_POSITION, GL_SPOT_CUTOFF, GL_SPOT_DIRECTION,
GL_SPOT_EXPONENT, GL_CONSTANT_ATTENUATION, GL_LINEAR_ATTENUATION, and
GL_QUADRATIC_ATTENUATION are accepted.
params Specifies the value that parameter pname of light source light will be set to.

LightModel (pname, params)

Set the lighting model parametersOpenGL Documentation: glLightModel

pname Specifies a single-valued lighting model parameter.

GL_LIGHT_MODEL_LOCAL_VIEWER, GL_LIGHT_MODEL_COLOR_CONTROL, and

1026

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_LIGHT_MODEL_TWO_SIDE are accepted.
params Specifies the value that param will be set to.

LineStipple (factor, pattern)

Specify the line stipple patternOpenGL Documentation: glLineStipple

factor Specifies a multiplier for each bit in the line stipple pattern. If factor is 3, for

example, each bit in the pattern is used three times before the next bit in the pattern is
used. factor is clamped to the range [1, 256] and defaults to 1.
pattern Specifies a 16-bit integer whose bit pattern determines which fragments of a line

will be drawn when the line is rasterized. Bit zero is used first; the default pattern is all 1's.

LineWidth (width)

Specify the width of rasterized linesOpenGL Documentation: glLineWidth

width Specifies the width of rasterized lines. The initial value is 1.

ListBase (base)

Set the display-list base for glCallListsOpenGL Documentation: glListBase

base Specifies an integer offset that will be added to glCallLists offsets to generate

display-list names. The initial value is 0.

1027

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

LoadIdentity ()

Replace the current matrix with the identity matrixOpenGL Documentation: glLoadIdentity

LoadMatrix (m)

Replace the current matrix with the specified matrixOpenGL Documentation: glLoadMatrix

m Specifies 16 consecutive values, which are used as the elements of a 4×4 column-major

matrix.

LoadName (name)

Load a name onto the name stackOpenGL Documentation: glLoadName

name Specifies a name that will replace the top value on the name stack.

LogicOp (opcode)

Specify a logical pixel operation for color index renderingOpenGL Documentation: glLogicOp

opcode Specifies a symbolic constant that selects a logical operation. The following

symbols are accepted: GL_CLEAR, GL_SET, GL_COPY, GL_COPY_INVERTED, GL_NOOP,
GL_INVERT, GL_AND, GL_NAND, GL_OR, GL_NOR, GL_XOR, GL_EQUIV,
GL_AND_REVERSE, GL_AND_INVERTED, GL_OR_REVERSE, and GL_OR_INVERTED. The
initial value is GL_COPY.

1028

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

Material (face, pname, params)

Specify material parameters for the lighting modelOpenGL Documentation: glMaterial

face Specifies which face or faces are being updated. Must be one of GL_FRONT,

GL_BACK, or GL_FRONT_AND_BACK.
pname Specifies the material parameter of the face or faces that is being updated. Must be

one of GL_AMBIENT, GL_DIFFUSE, GL_SPECULAR, GL_EMISSION, GL_SHININESS,
GL_AMBIENT_AND_DIFFUSE, or GL_COLOR_INDEXES.
params Specifies a pointer to the value or values that pname will be set to.

MatrixMode (mode)

Specify which matrix is the current matrixOpenGL Documentation: glMatrixMode

mode Specifies which matrix stack is the target for subsequent matrix operations. Three

values are accepted: GL_MODELVIEW, GL_PROJECTION, and GL_TEXTURE. The initial
value is GL_MODELVIEW. Additionally, if the ARB_imaging extension is supported,
GL_COLOR is also accepted.

MultMatrix (m)

Multiply the current matrix with the specified matrixOpenGL Documentation: glMultMatrix

m Specifies 16 consecutive values, which are used as the elements of a 4×4 column-major

matrix.

1029

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

NewList (list, mode)

Create or replace a display listOpenGL Documentation: glNewList

list Specifies the display-list name.
mode Specifies the compilation mode, which can be GL_COMPILE or

GL_COMPILE_AND_EXECUTE.

Normal (...)

Set the current normal vectorOpenGL Documentation: glNormal

... Either a 3 numbers or a table specifying the x, y, and z coordinates of the new current

normal. The initial value of the current normal is the unit vector, (0, 0, 1).

Ortho (left, right, bottom, top, near, far)

Multiply the current matrix with an orthographic matrixOpenGL Documentation: glOrtho

left Specify the coordinates for the left vertical clipping plane.
right Specify the coordinates for the right vertical clipping plane.
bottom Specify the coordinates for the bottom horizontal clipping plane.
top Specify the coordinates for the top horizontal clipping plane.
near Specify the distances to the nearer depth clipping plane. This value is negative if the

plane is to be behind the viewer.

1030

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

far Specify the distances to the farther depth clipping plane. This value is negative if the

plane is to be behind the viewer.

PassThrough (token)

Place a marker in the feedback bufferOpenGL Documentation: glPassThrough

token Specifies a marker value to be placed in the feedback buffer following a

GL_PASS_THROUGH_TOKEN.

PixelStore (pname, param)

Set pixel storage modesOpenGL Documentation: glPixelStore

pname Specifies the symbolic name of the parameter to be set. Six values affect the

packing of pixel data into memory: GL_PACK_SWAP_BYTES, GL_PACK_LSB_FIRST,
GL_PACK_ROW_LENGTH, GL_PACK_IMAGE_HEIGHT, GL_PACK_SKIP_PIXELS,
GL_PACK_SKIP_ROWS, GL_PACK_SKIP_IMAGES, and GL_PACK_ALIGNMENT. Six more
affect the unpacking of pixel data from memory: GL_UNPACK_SWAP_BYTES,
GL_UNPACK_LSB_FIRST, GL_UNPACK_ROW_LENGTH, GL_UNPACK_IMAGE_HEIGHT,
GL_UNPACK_SKIP_PIXELS, GL_UNPACK_SKIP_ROWS, GL_UNPACK_SKIP_IMAGES, and
GL_UNPACK_ALIGNMENT.
param Specifies the value that pname is set to.

PixelTransfer (pname, param)

Set pixel transfer modesOpenGL Documentation: glPixelTransfer

1031

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

pname Specifies the symbolic name of the pixel transfer parameter to be set. Must be one

of the following: GL_MAP_COLOR, GL_MAP_STENCIL, GL_INDEX_SHIFT,
GL_INDEX_OFFSET, GL_RED_SCALE, GL_RED_BIAS, GL_GREEN_SCALE, GL_GREEN_BIAS,
GL_BLUE_SCALE, GL_BLUE_BIAS, GL_ALPHA_SCALE, GL_ALPHA_BIAS,
GL_DEPTH_SCALE, or GL_DEPTH_BIAS.
param Specifies the value that pname is set to.

PixelZoom (xfactor, yfactor)

Specify the pixel zoom factorsOpenGL Documentation: glPixelZoom

xfactor Specify the x zoom factor for pixel write operations.
yfactor Specify the y zoom factor for pixel write operations.

PointSize (size)

Specify the diameter of rasterized pointsOpenGL Documentation: glPointSize

size Specifies the diameter of rasterized points. The initial value is 1.

PolygonMode (face, mode)

Select a polygon rasterization modeOpenGL Documentation: glPolygonMode

face Specifies the polygons that mode applies to. Must be GL_FRONT for front-facing

polygons, GL_BACK for back-facing polygons, or GL_FRONT_AND_BACK for front- and

1032

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

back-facing polygons.
mode Specifies how polygons will be rasterized. Accepted values are GL_POINT, GL_LINE,

and GL_FILL. The initial value is GL_FILL for both front- and back-facing polygons.

PolygonOffset (factor, units)

Set the scale and units used to calculate depth valuesOpenGL Documentation: glPolygonOffset

factor Specifies a scale factor that is used to create a variable depth offset for each

polygon. The initial value is 0.
units Is multiplied by an implementation-specific value to create a constant depth offset.

The initial value is 0.

PopAttrib ()

Pop the server attribute stackOpenGL Documentation: glPopAttrib

PopClientAttrib ()

Pop the client attribute stackOpenGL Documentation: glPopClientAttrib

PopMatrix ()

Pop the current matrix stackOpenGL Documentation: glPopMatrix

1033

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

PopName ()

Pop the name stackOpenGL Documentation: glPopName

PushAttrib (mask)

Push the server attribute stackOpenGL Documentation: glPushAttrib

mask Specifies a mask that indicates which attributes to save.

PushClientAttrib ()

Push the client attribute stackOpenGL Documentation: glPushClientAttrib

PushMatrix ()

Push the current matrix stackOpenGL Documentation: glPushMatrix

PushName (name)

Push the name stackOpenGL Documentation: glPushName

1034

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

name Specifies a name that will be pushed onto the name stack.

RasterPos (..)

Specify the raster position for pixel operationsOpenGL Documentation: glRasterPos

.. Specifies an array or list of values of two, three, or four elements, specifying x, y, z, and

w coordinates, respectively.

ReadBuffer (mode)

Select a color buffer source for pixelsOpenGL Documentation: glReadBuffer

mode Specifies a color buffer. Accepted values are GL_FRONT_LEFT, GL_FRONT_RIGHT,

GL_BACK_LEFT, GL_BACK_RIGHT, GL_FRONT, GL_BACK, GL_LEFT, GL_RIGHT, and
GL_AUXi, where i is between 0 and the value of GL_AUX_BUFFERS minus 1.

Rect (...)

Draw a rectangleOpenGL Documentation: glRect

... Specify the vertices of a rectangle as an array or list of 4 values.

RenderMode (mode)

1035

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

Set rasterization modeOpenGL Documentation: glRenderMode

mode Specifies the rasterization mode. Three values are accepted: GL_RENDER,

GL_SELECT, and GL_FEEDBACK. The initial value is GL_RENDER.

Rotate (...)

Multiply the current matrix by a rotation matrixOpenGL Documentation: glRotate

... Specify an array or list of 4 values with the order being the angle of rotation in degrees

and then the the x, y, and z coordinates of a vector, respectively

Scale (...)

Multiply the current matrix by a general scaling matrixOpenGL Documentation: glScale

... Specify an array or list of 3 values of scale factors along the x, y, and z axes,

respectively

Scissor (x, y, width, height)

Define the scissor boxOpenGL Documentation: glScissor

x Specify the x-coordinate of the lower left corner of the scissor box.
y Specify the y-coordinate of the lower left corner of the scissor box.
width Specify the width of the scissor box.
height Specify the height of the scissor box.

1036

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

ShadeModel (mode)

Select flat or smooth shadingOpenGL Documentation: glShadeModel

mode Specifies a symbolic value representing a shading technique. Accepted values are

GL_FLAT and GL_SMOOTH. The initial value is GL_SMOOTH.

StencilFunc (func, ref, mask)

Set front and back function and reference value for stencil testingOpenGL Documentation:
glStencilFunc

func Specifies the test function. Eight symbolic constants are valid: GL_NEVER, GL_LESS,

GL_LEQUAL, GL_GREATER, GL_GEQUAL, GL_EQUAL, GL_NOTEQUAL, and GL_ALWAYS.
The initial value is GL_ALWAYS.
ref Specifies the reference value for the stencil test. ref is clamped to the range 0 2 n-1 ,

where n is the number of bitplanes in the stencil buffer. The initial value is 0.
mask Specifies a mask that is ANDed with both the reference value and the stored stencil

value when the test is done. The initial value is all 1's.

StencilMask (mask)

Control the front and back writing of individual bits in the stencil planesOpenGL Documentation:
glStencilMask

mask Specifies a bit mask to enable and disable writing of individual bits in the stencil

planes. Initially, the mask is all 1's.

1037

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

StencilOp (sfail, dpfail, dppass)

Set front and back stencil test actionsOpenGL Documentation: glStencilOp

sfail Specifies the action to take when the stencil test fails. Eight symbolic constants are

accepted: GL_KEEP, GL_ZERO, GL_REPLACE, GL_INCR, GL_INCR_WRAP, GL_DECR,
GL_DECR_WRAP, and GL_INVERT. The initial value is GL_KEEP.
dpfail Specifies the stencil action when the stencil test passes, but the depth test fails.

dpfail accepts the same symbolic constants as sfail. The initial value is GL_KEEP.
dppass Specifies the stencil action when both the stencil test and the depth test pass, or

when the stencil test passes and either there is no depth buffer or depth testing is not
enabled. dppass accepts the same symbolic constants as sfail. The initial value is GL_KEEP.

TexCoord (..)

Set the current texture coordinatesOpenGL Documentation: glTexCoord

.. Specifies an array or list of one, two, three, or four elements, which in turn specify the s,

t, r, and q texture coordinates.

TexEnv (target, pname, param)

Set texture environment parametersOpenGL Documentation: glTexEnv

target Specifies a texture environment. May be GL_TEXTURE_ENV,

GL_TEXTURE_FILTER_CONTROL or GL_POINT_SPRITE.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of a single-valued texture environment parameter. May

be either GL_TEXTURE_ENV_MODE, GL_TEXTURE_LOD_BIAS, GL_COMBINE_RGB,

1038

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_COMBINE_ALPHA, GL_SRC0_RGB, GL_SRC1_RGB, GL_SRC2_RGB, GL_SRC0_ALPHA,
GL_SRC1_ALPHA, GL_SRC2_ALPHA, GL_OPERAND0_RGB, GL_OPERAND1_RGB,
GL_OPERAND2_RGB, GL_OPERAND0_ALPHA, GL_OPERAND1_ALPHA,
GL_OPERAND2_ALPHA, GL_RGB_SCALE, GL_ALPHA_SCALE, or GL_COORD_REPLACE.
param Specifies a single symbolic constant, one of GL_ADD, GL_ADD_SIGNED,

GL_INTERPOLATE, GL_MODULATE, GL_DECAL, GL_BLEND, GL_REPLACE,
GL_SUBTRACT, GL_COMBINE, GL_TEXTURE, GL_CONSTANT, GL_PRIMARY_COLOR,
GL_PREVIOUS, GL_SRC_COLOR, GL_ONE_MINUS_SRC_COLOR, GL_SRC_ALPHA,
GL_ONE_MINUS_SRC_ALPHA, a single boolean value for the point sprite texture
coordinate replacement, a single floating-point value for the texture level-of-detail bias, or
1.0, 2.0, or 4.0 when specifying the GL_RGB_SCALE or GL_ALPHA_SCALE.

TexGen (coord, pname, param)

Control the generation of texture coordinatesOpenGL Documentation: glTexGen

coord Specifies a texture coordinate. Must be one of GL_S, GL_T, GL_R, or GL_Q.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of the texture-coordinate generation function. Must be

GL_TEXTURE_GEN_MODE.
param Specifies a single-valued texture generation parameter, one of GL_OBJECT_LINEAR,

GL_EYE_LINEAR, GL_SPHERE_MAP, GL_NORMAL_MAP, or GL_REFLECTION_MAP.

TexParameter (target, pname, param)

Set texture parametersOpenGL Documentation: glTexParameter

target Specifies the target texture, which must be either GL_TEXTURE_1D,

GL_TEXTURE_2D, GL_TEXTURE_3D, or GL_TEXTURE_CUBE_MAP.
pname Specifies the symbolic name of a single-valued texture parameter. pname can be

one of the following: GL_TEXTURE_MIN_FILTER, GL_TEXTURE_MAG_FILTER,
GL_TEXTURE_MIN_LOD, GL_TEXTURE_MAX_LOD, GL_TEXTURE_BASE_LEVEL,

1039

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings

GL_TEXTURE_MAX_LEVEL, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_S, GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_T,
GL_TEXTURE_WRAP_R, GL_TEXTURE_PRIORITY, GL_TEXTURE_COMPARE_MODE,
GL_TEXTURE_COMPARE_FUNC, GL_DEPTH_TEXTURE_MODE, or
GL_GENERATE_MIPMAP.
param Specifies the value of pname.

Translate (...)

Multiply the current matrix by a translation matrixOpenGL Documentation: glTranslate

... Specify an array or list of 3 values of translation vector

Vertex (..)

Specify a vertexOpenGL Documentation: glVertex

.. Specifies an array or list of two, three, or four elements, which in turn specify the x, y, z,

and w vertex coordinates.

Viewport (x, y, width, height)

Set the viewportOpenGL Documentation: glViewport

x Specify the x-coordinate of the lower left corner of the viewport rectangle.
y Specify the y-coordinate of the lower left corner of the viewport rectangle.
width Specify the width of the viewport rectangle.
height Specify the height of the viewport rectangle.

1040

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL GLU Bindings

jit.gl.lua OpenGL GLU Bindings
The GLU (openGL Utility) bindings are located in the opengl.glu module. It is a sub-module of
opengl module. To access them, use Lua's built-in require function as follows:

local

glu = require( "opengl.glu" )

For the standard OpenGL bindings, see the jit.gl.lua OpenGL Bindings.

LookAt (eye, center, up)

Define a viewing transformationOpenGL Documentation: gluLookAt If LookAt has nine arguments,
it expects unpacked vectors. Otherwise, it will look for 3 vectors as arguments.

eye Specifies the position of the eye point.
center Specifies the position of the reference point.
up Specifies the direction of the up vector.

Ortho2D (left, right, bottom, up)

Define a 2D orthographic projection matrixOpenGL Documentation: gluOrtho2D

left Specify the coordinates for the left vertical clipping planes.
right Specify the coordinates for the right vertical clipping planes.

1041

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua OpenGL GLU Bindings

bottom Specify the coordinates for the bottom horizontal clipping planes.
up Specify the coordinates for the up horizontal clipping planes.

Perspective (fovy, aspect, near, far)

Set up a perspective projection matrixOpenGL Documentation: gluPerspective

fovy Specifies the field of view angle, in degrees, in the y direction.
aspect Specifies the aspect ratio that determines the field of view in the x direction. The

aspect ratio is the ratio of x (width) to y (height).
near Specifies the distance from the viewer to the near clipping plane (always positive).
far Specifies the distance from the viewer to the far clipping plane (always positive).

Project (...)

Map object coordinates to window coordinatesOpenGL Documentation: gluProject

... Specify the object coordinates as either a table or unpacked values.

UnProject (...)

Map window coordinates to object coordinatesOpenGL Documentation: gluUnProject

... Specify the window coordinates as either a table or unpacked values.

1042

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

jit.gl.lua Vector Math
vec2

1043

vec3

1045

vec4

1049

quat
mat3

1051
1053

mat4

1054

The vector math functions in jit.gl.lua are located in the vec module and are organized into six
categories. These categories are:- vec.vec2

vec.vec3
vec.vec4
vec.quat
vec.mat3
vec.mat4 The arguments to all of the vector math functions are tables containing the
appropriate number of values for the data type. For example a vec2 is a table with two
elements, {1, 2}, while a mat3 has nine elements {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9}. The matrices are
specified in column-major order so for a mat3, the first three elements are the first column,
the second three the second column and so on.

vec2

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = vec2.equal(v1, v2)

1043

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = vec2.not_equal(v1, v2)

res = vec2.dot(v1, v2)

res = vec2.normalize(v)

res = vec2.mult(v1, v2)

res = vec2.scale(v, s)

res = vec2.div(v1, v2)

res = vec2.sub(v1, v2)

res = vec2.add(v1, v2)

1044

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = vec2.mag_sqr(v)

res = vec2.mag(v)

res = vec2.negate(v)

res = vec2.max(v1, v2)

res = vec2.lerp(v1, v2, t)

vec3

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = vec3.equal(v1, v2)

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = vec3.not_equal(v1, v2)

1045

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = vec3.mult(v1, v2)

res = vec3.scale(v, s)

res = vec3.div(v1, v2)

res = vec3.sub(v1, v2)

res = vec3.add(v1, v2)

res = vec3.mag_sqr(v)

res = vec3.mag(v)

res = vec3.negate(v)

1046

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = vec3.cross(v1, v2)

res = vec3.dot(v1, v2)

res = vec3.reflect(v1, v2)

-- calculate the normal to a triangle defined by three points
res = vec3.normal(p1, p2, p3)

res = vec3.normalize(v)

res = vec3.max(v1, v2)

res = vec3.min(v1, v2)

res = vec3.lerp(v1, v2, t)

1047

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = vec3.intersect_line_sphere(linepos1, linepos2, sphere_center,
sphere_radius)

res = vec3.axisx_from_quat(quat)

res = vec3.axisy_from_quat(quat)

res = vec3.axisz_from_quat(quat)

res = vec3.transform_axisangle(axis, angle, v)

res = vec3.mult_mat3(v, mat3)

res = vec3.centroid3(v1, v2, v3)

res = vec3.centroid4(v1, v2, v3, v4)

1048

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

vec4

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = vec4.equal(v1, v2)

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = vec4.not_equal(v1, v2)

res = vec4.mult(v1, v2)

res = vec4.scale(v, s)

res = vec4.div(v1, v2)

res = vec4.sub(v1, v2)

res = vec4.add(v1, v2)

1049

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = vec4.mag_sqr(v)

res = vec4.mag(v)

res = vec4.negate(v)

res = vec4.dot(v1, v2)

res = vec4.normalize(v)

res = vec4.max(v1, v2)

res = vec4.min(v1, v2)

res = vec4.lerp(v1, v2, t)

1050

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = vec4.mult_mat4(v, mat4)

quat

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = quat.equal(q1, q2)

-- res is a 1 or 0 depending on equality
res = quat.not_equal(q1, q2)

res = quat.mult(q1, q2)

res = quat.scale(q, s)

res = quat.div(q1, q2)

res = quat.add(q1, q2)

1051

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = quat.mag_sqr(q)

res = quat.mag(q)

res = quat.negate(q)

res = quat.dot(q1, q2)

res = quat.normalize(q)

res = quat.max(q1, q2)

res = quat.min(q1, q2)

res = quat.slerp(q1, q2, t)

1052

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = quat.from_mat3(mat3)

res = quat.from_mat4(mat4)

res = quat.from_axis_angle(axis, angle)

res = quat.conj(q)

res = quat.from_euler(euler_angles)

mat3

res = mat3.add(m1, m2)

res = mat3.mult(m1, m2)

res = mat3.transpose(m)

1053

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = mat3.mult_vec3(m, v)

res = mat3.from_axisangle(axis, angle)

res = mat3.from_uv(v1, v2)

res = mat3.determinant(m)

res = mat3.negate(m)

res = mat3.from_mat4(mat4)

res = mat3.from_quat(q)

mat4

res = mat4.add(m1, m2)

1054

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = mat4.mult(m1, m2)

res = mat4.transpose(m)

res = mat4.mult_vec4(m, v)

res = mat4.from_axisangle(axis, angle)

res = mat4.from_uv(v1, v2)

res = mat4.determinant(m)

res = mat4.negate(m)

res = mat4.from_quat(q)

1055

User Guide / Appendix B: Lua Extended / jit.gl.lua Vector Math

res = mat4.look_at(eye, center, up)

res = mat4.frustum(left, right, bottom, top, near, far)

res = mat4.perspective(fovy, aspect, near, far)

res = mat4.ortho(left, right, bottom, top, near, far)

1056

User Guide / Credits

Credits
Cycling '74
440 N Barranca Ave #4074
Covina, CA 91723 USA

Copyright 2026 Cycling '74. All rights reserved.

This document, as well as the software described in it, is furnished under license and may be used
or copied only in accordance with the terms of such license. The content of this document is
furnished for informational use only, is subject to change without notice, and should not be
construed as a commitment by Cycling '74. Every effort has been made to ensure that the
information in this document is accurate. Cycling '74 assumes no responsibility or liability for any
errors or inaccuracies that may appear in this document.

Except as permitted by such license, no part of this publication may be reproduced, edited, stored in
a retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, recording or
otherwise, without the prior written permission of Cycling '74.

Contact Support: https://cycling74.com/support/contact

1057

